ACCT 110 
Introduction to Applied Accounting 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is a basic course in accounting terminology, accounting principles, and the application of accounting 
within the workplace. (Correctional Facilities Only) 
 
ACCT 201 
Principles of Accounting I 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is an introductory course to financial accounting theory and practice in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. Emphasis is on development and use of financial statements and other 
necessary financial information. 
 
ACCT 202 
Principles of Accounting II 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course includes the development and use of financial and managerial reports, government 
accounting, and basic accounting information systems. Prerequisite: ACCT 201. 
 
ACCT 210 
Payroll Accounting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course emphasizes the calculation of the payroll and the payroll taxes. Attention is given to the 
preparation of those records and reports that form the foundation of an efficient payroll system and to 
various laws affecting payroll. Prerequisite: ACCT 201. 
 
ACCT 301 
Intermediate Accounting I 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course covers accounting theory, generally accepted accounting principles, and financial statement 
preparation as applied to the assets of an enterprise. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. 
 
ACCT 302 
Intermediate Accounting II 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course covers accounting theory, generally accepted accounting principles, and financial statement 
preparation as applied to the liabilities and equities of an enterprise; the course also covers statement of 
cash flows. Prerequisite: ACCT 301. 
 
ACCT 315 
Managerial Accounting 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course explores the use of accounting data for external reporting and internal planning and control. 
Areas of study include job order, process, and standard cost accounting systems. Budgeting and 
profitability analysis, accounting for leases, earnings per share, and accounting for income taxes are also 
covered. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. 
 
ACCT 325 
Accounting Information Systems 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the concept of data and information, develops the characteristics of general 
information systems, and presents techniques for their analysis and design. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. 
 
ACCT 401 
Individual Taxation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers current federal income tax law related to gross income and deductions of individuals 
and businesses. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. 
 
 
ACCT 402 
Business Taxation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers current federal income tax law dealing with complex problems related to corporations, 
subchapter S corporations, partnerships, estates, and trusts. 
 
ACCT 410 
Advanced Accounting  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course addresses theory and techniques for accounting and reporting for partnerships, branch 
operations, and consolidations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Prerequisite: 
ACCT 302. 
 
ACCT 425 
Auditing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Standards, theories, procedures, techniques, and responsibilities involved in auditing and reporting on 
financial statements are covered. Compilation and review of financial statements are also addressed. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 202.  
 
ACCT 445 
Studies in Accounting  
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This course is an in-depth study or investigation of a significant topic in accounting practices and theory. 
It may be taken more than once if the area of study is different. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. 
 
Actuarial Science 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for actuarial science courses 
or permission of the instructor. 
 
AS 203  Mathematical Theory of Interest 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers a range of topics relevant to Actuaries, including measurement of interest rates, basic 
problems in interest theory, basic annuities, continuous and varying annuities, yield 
rates, amortization, bonds and other securities, practical applications, and stochastic approaches to 
interest. More broadly, course material will cover pricing of bonds, mortgages, annuities, and other 
financial instruments. Return on investment, duration, convexity, and portfolio immunization are also 
covered. Prerequisites: MATH 216 and MATH 317 
 
AS 303  Financial Mathematics for Actuaries I - Discrete Time   
3 hours 
This course serves as an introduction to derivative contracts and option combinations. It also covers 
Arbitrage-free option bounds & early exercise of American options. Arbitrage-free valuation and risk-
neutral pricing are used to price vanilla and exotic contracts using the binomial asset pricing model in 
discrete time, and the quantitative strategies to hedge portfolios consisting of such assets are also 
discussed. Prerequisites: MATH 225, MATH 318, MATH 325, CS 101, CS 350, and CS 440 
 
AS 313  Financial Mathematics for Actuaries II - Continuous Time 
3 hours 
This course covers the rational valuation of stock and currency options and the application of option 
“Greeks" to solve a range of problems. It also serves as an introduction to lognormal pricing, Monte-Carlo 
simulations, and Brownian motion. Finally, it explores the interest rate models of Vasicek, Cox-Ross-
Ingersoll, and Black-Derman-Toy to model and price derivatives on bonds. Prerequisites: MATH 318, AS 
203, and AS 303 
 
AS 403  
Actuarial Sciences and Risk Management with R  
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on team-based problem solving in actuarial science & risk management. 
Students will learn the fundamentals of the R programming language, RStudio and R Markdown, 

 
and use these tools to complete a range of projects. Projects vary, but may include bond and 
loan amortization, analysis of the efficient frontier and the capital asset pricing method, insurance liability 
& estimates of expected loss. This course culminates in a capstone project that ties together skills from 
throughout the Actuarial Sciences concentration. Prerequisites: AS 313 and MATH 425 
 
Agribusiness  
 
AGR 101 
Introduction to Agribusiness  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes a solid foundation of agribusiness by providing an overview of career opportunities 
in the industry with agribusiness management concepts. Topics studied include basic business analytics 
for analysis of trends, integrating long term profit maximization and how the four functions of 
management can support agribusiness managers in accomplishing their goals.  
 
AGR 210 
Trends in Agribusiness & Natural Resources  
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes an application of agribusiness principles with the latest agricultural technology and 
innovation. Specific problems are included with case studies and special projects to review new trends in 
agribusiness with the impact of using and protecting natural resources. 
 
AGR 310 
Agribusiness Marketing & Sales 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers agribusiness marketing by analyzing markets trends, consumer demands, marketing 
functions, institutions and commodities. Students will demonstrate competence in communication of 
agricultural marketing and sales techniques with verbal, graphic and mathematical skills. 
 
AGR 320 
Agribusiness Economics 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes economic issues related to production principles, supply and revenue, profit 
maximization, consumption and demand, competitive markets, international agri-economics and rural 
development. The role of agriculture in the U.S. and world economies will be studied. 
 
AGR 330  
Agribusiness Finance  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes a comprehensive analysis of the capital and credit needs in agribusiness. This 
includes methods of securing debit and equity capital, sourced of credit, legal concerns, credit analysis, 
and challenges in obtaining credit along with financing a repayment plan for operating loans. 
 
AGR 420 
Agribusiness Technologies 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the available technologies in the field of agribusiness to increase efficiency and 
productivity. The fundamental components of precision agriculture include topics of global positioning 
system (GPS), geographic information system (GIS), remote sensing, yield monitoring, and drone 
application for decision making in the field. 
 
AGR 410  
Agribusiness Management & Social Perspectives 
 
 
3 hours 
This course reviews insights from managers and leaders in the agribusiness field. Leadership and 
management qualities with strategies are included along with how ethics and faith are integrated in 
today’s society.  
 
AGR 440 
Agribusiness Internship Portfolio 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on using a student's approved internship experience to design and build a print and 
an e-portfolio. This gives the student an opportunity to enhance his or her academic background in a 
practical and reflective way from the internship and other academic experiences. Students will provide 

 
evidence of personal and professional accomplishments, along with academic learning and skills mastered 
for future employers. Prerequisite: Student must get the internship pre-approved by the instructor 
for use in this course. Internship hours are to be completed prior to this course or to be completed 
concurrently during this course. 
 
AGR 445 
Agribusiness Professional Practicum  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course has the application of theory with skills learned in the major for experiential learning. The 
practicum will include projects related to the student’s major and interest in the field. Students must 
coordinate all practicum projects with their instructor to coordinate projects to support trends in the field.  
 
Art 
 
ART 103 
Art Appreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introductory lecture course in art which 
explores the creative history and processes for making art that have been utilized by humankind across 
cultures, from the pre-historic through the modern era. You will have the opportunity to acquire an 
appreciation of the practices, methods, and media an artist uses and you will be introduced to basic 
theories of art. The student will explore the process involved in critiquing art and the proper language 
used to discuss art. 
 
ART 250 
Graphic Design I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to graphic design and the use of the computer as a design tool. 
Problem solving techniques using type and image in layouts are applied to a number of commonly 
recurring situations in communication design. Basic introductions to Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator, and 
InDesign are provided. 
 
Biblical Studies 
 
BIB 205 
New Testament Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a general survey of the New Testament. It provides insight into historical, social, political, 
and religious contexts in which it was written and presents its major themes. (Early College Course Only) 
 
BIB 210 
Old Testament I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introduction to the historical background, literary nature, and theological message of the 
Books of the Old Testament, with particular emphasis on the content and authority of these Books as Holy 
Scripture for the Church and the minister. The first semester covers the Pentateuch (Genesis-
Deuteronomy) and the Former Prophets (Joshua -2 Kings). (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
BIB 220 
Old Testament II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introduction to the historical background, literary nature, and theological message of the 
Books of the Old Testament, with particular emphasis on the content and authority of these Books as Holy 
Scripture for the Church and the minister. As a continuation of Biblical Studies 101, the course covers the 
remaining Books of the Christian Old Testament. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
BIB 230 
New Testament I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introduction to the historical background, literary nature, and theological message of the 
Books of the New Testament, with particular emphasis on the content and authority of these Books as 

Holy Scripture for the Church and the minister. The first semester usually covers the Synoptic Gospels 
(Matthew, Mark, and Luke) and the Gospel of John. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
BIB 240 
New Testament II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introduction to the historical background, literary nature, and theological message of the 
Books of the New Testament, with particular emphasis on the content and authority of these Books as 
Holy Scripture for the Church and the minister. As a continuation of Biblical Studies 105, the course covers 
the remaining Books of the New Testament. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
BIB 308 
Christian Doctrine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A general introduction to the major themes and doctrines of Christian theology. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
BIB 401 
Elementary Greek I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is the beginning of the study of Koine Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary. Acquiring 
facility in reading the Greek New Testament is pursued. 
 
BIB 402 
Elementary Greek II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course completes the introduction to Koine Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary. As a 
continuation of BIB 401, completion of the basic elements of the language lays a foundation for life-long 
learning and reading of Greek for preaching and teaching.  
 
BIB 403 
Old Testament Hebrew I 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to the study of Hebrew grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and lexicography. A history of the 
Hebrew language and general principles for translation and interpretation are offered. Acquiring facility in 
actual translation of the Hebrew Old Testament is pursued. 
 
BIB 404 
Old Testament Hebrew II 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An inductive study of intermediate Hebrew grammar based on a close reading of the Hebrew text of an 
Old Testament book. Skill in discerning nuances of Hebrew grammar and syntax is stressed. Emphasis is 
placed on vocabulary building, accurate translation, exegesis, and pronunciation. Theological issues 
arising out of the Hebrew text are considered. 
 
BIB 445 
Studies in Biblical Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Advanced Bible study with the theme changing each time the course is offered. Themes of previous 
semesters have included: the writings of the prophets, studies in Paul, poetic literature of the Old 
Testament, the Pentateuch, and the Parables of Jesus. 
 
Biology 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for biology courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
BIO 101  
Introduction to Life Science  
 
 
 
 
 3 hours  
A course designed for non-science majors, introducing students to the study of living organisms. The 
course includes basic introductions to cell and molecular biology as well as a brief kingdom survey of 
organisms (bacteria, protists, fungi, plants, and animals) and their biology. (Credit available for non-
science majors only.) 
 

 
BIO 105  
Environmental Biology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
Introduction to principles of ecology and the interaction of organisms and the environment, paying 
particular attention to the impact of humans on the environment. The course addresses topics of 
environmental and resource conservation.  
 
BIO 111 
 Principles of Biology I  
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours  
Introduction to cellular biology covering basic chemistry, cell structure and function, cell division, 
photosynthesis and respiration, and introductory genetics.  
 
BIO 112 
 Principles of Biology II 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours  
Introduction to organismal biology covering general survey of bacteria, protists, plants, fungi, and 
animals. Prerequisites: BIO 111 or permission of instructor. 
 
BIO 300  
Dendrology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
The study of the taxonomy, habitats, range, economic, folk, historic use, and ecological features of 
important North American tree species. The course focuses on field and lab techniques for the 
identification and classification of trees. Prerequisites: BIO 112.  
 
BIO 315  
Introduction to Microbiology   
 
 
 
 
4 hours  
An introductory study of the structure, function, identification, pathology, and ecology of microorganisms. 
Laboratory activities include growth techniques through preparation of media, maintenance of cultures, 
methods of microbial growth control, aseptic technique, microbiology and foods, and microscope slide 
preparation. Prerequisites: BIO 112, and CHEM 102 or permission of instructor. 
 
BIO 318  
Microbial Ecology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
This course is designed for undergraduate students interested in environmental biology/science/studies. 
Students in this course will build upon the basic principles and skills gained in introductory microbiology 
and environmental science courses. The focus will be on microbial functions in ecosystems, examining the 
interactions between microbial communities and their environments (air, water, and land), and the impact 
of these relationships on biogeochemical cycles. Prerequisites: BIO 112, and CHEM 102 or permission 
of instructor. 
 
BIO 321 
Principles of Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
 
 
4 hours 
Designed for science majors, this course is a study of biochemistry, cellular structure and function, 
histology, and the system study of the integumentary, skeletal, muscular, and nervous systems of 
the human body. Laboratory with dissections. Prerequisites: BIO 112, and CHEM 102 or consent of 
instructor. (HPE Majors can take BIO 321 if they have completed BIO 101. 
 
BIO 322  
Principles of Human Anatomy and Physiology II  
 
 
4 hours  
A continuation of BIO 321 covering the endocrine, circulatory, lymphatic, digestive, respiratory, urinary, 
and reproductive systems. Laboratory with dissections. Prerequisite: BIO 321. 
  
BIO 350  
Marine Biology    
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
An introductory course in marine biology including the geology of the oceans, waves and tidal actions, 
survey of marine organisms and diversity of marine ecosystems, and human impact. Prerequisite: BIO 
112 or consent of instructor. 
 
 

 
BIO 400  
Preparation for Life Science Certification 
 
 
 
0 hours  
This course is designed to help students prepare for certification in Life Science. This course must be 
successfully completed in the semester immediately preceding a student-teacher assignment. Pass/Fail. 
Prerequisite: All Biology—Life Science Concentration coursework should be completed prior to, or 
concurrent with, this course. 
  
BIO 401  
Developmental Biology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
Principles and processes of sexual reproduction and embryonic development of sea stars, amphibians, 
birds and mammals. Topics include gametogenesis, fertilization, embryonic stages, cell differentiation, 
tissue development, organogenesis, regeneration, growth, and errors in development. Prerequisites: BIO 
112 and CHEM 102 or consent of instructor. 
  
BIO 405  
Ecology and Field Biology  
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours  
Relationships between organisms and their environment; approaches and practices for studying these 
relationships. Lecture and field laboratory. Prerequisites: BIO 112 and CHEM 102 or consent of 
instructor. 
  
BIO 410  
Principles of Genetics   
 
 
 
 
4 hours  
Principles and processes of inheritance. Includes study of cell division, molecular biology of DNA and RNA, 
and modes of inheritance. With laboratory. Prerequisites: BIO 112, and CHEM 102 or consent of 
instructor. 
 
BIO 415 
 Immunology   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
General properties of immune responses in humans, with a focus on the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms. There will be an emphasis on epidemiology, pathogenesis, and host defense responses. 
Prerequisites: BIO 315 and CHEM 102 or consent of instructor. 
 
BIO 441  
Topics in Environmental Science  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Lectures, field and/or lab work, discussions, and readings in restricted topics in environmental science. 
Prerequisite: permission of instructor. 
 
BIO 442  
Topics in Biotechnology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Lectures, field and/or lab work, discussions, and readings in restricted topics in biotechnology. Topics may 
include cell culturing, polymerase chain reaction, proteomics, and bioinformatics. Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor.  
 
BIO 445  
Studies in Biology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-4 hours 
Topics considered will change as the course is offered. May be taken three (3) times for credit. 
Prerequisite: permission of instructor.  
 
BIO 450  
Biology Internship  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
The purpose of this capstone course is to provide the student with off-campus work experience under the 
direction of a qualified professional or researcher. Prerequisites: BIO 112, CHEM 102, and junior or 
senior standing.  
 
 

 
Business 
 
BUS 101 
Introduction to Business 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is a survey course designed to acquaint the student with functions performed by business and the 
parts business activities play in the economy as a whole. Topics covered include types of business 
organizations, managing business information, the global economy, the social responsibility of business, 
and ethical decision making. 
 
BUS 175 
Business Mathematics  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to develop mathematical and computational skills necessary for subsequent 
courses in accounting and related business subjects. Areas of concentration are markups, markdowns, 
discounts, commissions, depreciation, taxes, simple and compound interest, stocks, bonds, and insurance. 
 
BUS 185 
Business Technology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course acquaints the student with the basic business-related functions of the computer and related 
technology. Areas of study include word processing, spreadsheets, electronic databases, the Internet, and 
electronic mail. The student will also design and deliver a PowerPoint presentation and will compose a 
professional resume. 
 
BUS 199 
Studies in Professional Business Practices 
 
 
 
 1 – 3 hours 
This course is designed to foster individual knowledge and understanding of various professional business 
practices. Topics of study include computer graphic design, interviewing techniques, management teams, 
and parliamentary procedure. Credit may be earned through participation in the Business Professionals of 
America (BPA). The student may enroll in the course up to four (4) times if a different topic is studied. 
 
BUS 201 
Portfolio Development  
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
This course will allow students to demonstrate, with specific examples, that they have produced 
substantive, professional work during their program of study. It is evidence of personal accomplishment, 
as well as a tangible demonstration of skills and learning for present or future employers. Portfolio 
documents will include a professional resume, co-authored or group projects, research papers, 
presentations showing technology skills, and case study analysis. 
 
BUS 202 
Professional Presentations 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will prepare business students for careers where employers demand confident, presenters who 
possess strong communication and presentation skills. Therefore, the focus of this course offering is on 
developing capable speakers who are able to organize, prepare, and deliver interesting, informative, and 
creative professional presentations. 
 
BUS 206 
Management Information Systems 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the learner to the foundations, technology and applications of Management 
Information Systems (MIS). The course covers topics in information technology, infrastructure, platforms, 
and telecommunications, systems development and management, managing global systems, and 
applications for the digital firm, including e-business and e- commerce. 
 
BUS 218 
Business Statistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to introduce the student to basic statistical methods. Topics include collection, 
organization, and summarization of data, basic probability, probability distributions, sampling 
distributions, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing.  

 
BUS 220 
Business Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of the foundations of psychology as the field applies to business and 
everyday life. Topics include personality; thinking, learning and memory; motivation and emotions; 
behavior; sensation, perception, and consciousness, and social psychology. A combination of theory, 
research, and real-life examples provide students with the knowledge to use psychology to enhance their 
professional and personal life. 
 
BUS 225 
Introduction to Hospitality Industry 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students are introduced to components of the hospitality industry of lodging and food service 
management. Topic explored will include the growth and development of hospitality industry, 
management of food services within the industry, marketing, security, maintenance of hospitality 
operations, and career opportunities in the field of travel and tourism. 
 
BUS 232 
Business Economics in the Global Economy 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course utilizes economic theory to analyze and understand optimal business decisions. Topics include 
the characteristics of cost and demand curves and the principles of profit maximizing pricing. The course 
explores different market structures and their consequences for business decisions. The macroeconomic 
environments, national and global, are also covered. Related questions addressed are: Why does an 
economy grow over time? What causes recessions and unemployment? Why do we have financial crises, 
and why are they potentially so damaging? Are government deficits detrimental or beneficial, and under 
what conditions? What determines changes in interest rates, the rate of inflation, and the foreign 
exchange rate, and what are the consequences of such changes?  
 
BUS 235 
Travel and Tourism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This introductory course examines travel and tourism by examining concepts and perspectives relevant to 
the travel and tourism industries and the role these play in today’s society. 
 
BUS 285 
Business Law and Ethics 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to acquaint the student with the nature of the law and its regulations of business 
activities. Areas of study include contracts, sales contracts, bailment, agency and employment, 
partnerships, corporations, insurance, real estate, wills, inheritances, and bankruptcy. 
 
BUS 299 
Topics in Business 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This course focuses on special topics of interest in business. Possible areas of study include electronic 
commerce, total quality management, and professional business etiquette. The student may take the 
course more than once if it is a different topic than previously studied. 
 
BUS 330 
Business Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on managerial finance and its relationship to other functions of businesses. Topics 
include ratio analysis, budgeting, forecasting, investment decisions, leverage decisions, leverage, and cost 
of capital. 
 
BUS 425 
Business Capstone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on contemporary problems in today’s world in light of one’s college experiences and 
learning, especially in the fields of business, industry, commerce, government, and the non-profit sector. 
Taken during the student’s senior year, this course is considered to be the capstone course for all 
undergraduate business majors earning the baccalaureate degree.  This course incorporates the Capstone 
Business Strategy simulation.  This business strategy simulation exposes students to the complexities of 

 
business and helps them explore the “big picture” while developing strategic thinking.  During this 
semester, students have the opportunity to compete in markets with multiple products, build an 
experiential understanding of key business principles and test a full range of business tactics.   Students 
will present the results of the simulation experiences in a professional presentation.  
 
BUS 440 
Business Internship Portfolio  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on using a student's approved internship experience to design and build a print and 
an e-portfolio. This gives the student an opportunity to enhance his or her academic background in a 
practical and reflective way from the internship and other academic experiences. Students will provide 
evidence of personal and professional accomplishments, along with academic learning and skills mastered 
for future employers. Prerequisite: Student must get the internship pre-approved by the instructor 
for use in this course. Internship hours are to be completed prior to this course or to be completed 
concurrently during this course. 
 
BUS 445 
Studies in Business Administration 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This advanced course is an in-depth study of a specific problem, issue, or topic in business. Possible areas 
of study include service-learning, business franchising, and securities and investments. The course may be 
repeated when different areas are studied. 
 
BUS 456 
Career and Technical Education 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of the historical and philosophical development of career and technical 
education in the United States. The student is introduced to the basic approaches and methods for 
teaching career and technical education to secondary and post-secondary students. Techniques in 
supervising and developing cooperative education programs will be developed. Government legislation 
affecting career and technical education will be discussed. The course helps fulfill the requirements for the 
business education student to earn his or her license from the state of Indiana in an area of career and 
technical education. 
 
BUS 499 
Advanced Studies in Business  
 
 
 
 
1-6 hours 
An in-depth study of topics of special interest in Business will be examined. Topics will vary. Students may 
repeat course for a total of six (6) credit hours. 
 
Chemistry 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for 
chemistry courses or permission of the instructor. 
 
CHEM 101  
General Chemistry I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Designed for science majors, this course introduces students to fundamental chemistry concepts, 
including: atomic structure and periodicity; chemical bonding; nomenclature of atoms, molecules, and 
ions; concentration calculations; types of chemical reactions; stoichiometry; thermochemistry; and safe 
laboratory techniques. Prerequisite: Students must be eligible to enroll in MATH 115 or higher.  
 
CHEM 102  
General Chemistry II   
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
This course is a continuation of CHEM101. Topics include: Thermochemistry; chemical kinetics; chemical 
equilibrium; acid-base equilibrium; buffers; titrations; solubility equilibrium; chemical thermodynamics; 
oxidation-reduction reactions; electrochemistry; and nuclear chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 101. 

 
CHEM 201  
Organic Chemistry I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Fundamental physical organic chemistry course. Topics include: electronic structures; spectroscopy; 
bonding; physical properties and nomenclature of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkyl halides, ethers and 
alcohols; and simple substitution and elimination reactions. Students will conduct typical organic chemical 
laboratory techniques, such as: Chemical tests; TLC; extraction; filtration; liquid-liquid extraction; and 
distillation. Prerequisite: CHEM 102. 
 
CHEM 202  
Organic Chemistry II   
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
An in-depth study of organic chemistry mechanisms and spectroscopy. Topics include: electrophiles, 
nucleophiles, SN1 and SN2 reactions, E1 and E2 reactions, electrophilic addition reactions, aromaticity, 
aromatic substitution reactions, alkylation, acylation, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared, 
and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy. Students will conduct typical organic chemical laboratory techniques, 
such as: Chemical tests; TLC; extraction; filtration; liquid-liquid extraction; and distillation. Prerequisites: 
CHEM 201.  
 
CHEM 301  
Quantitative Analysis   
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
A study of analytical methods of chemical analysis. Topics include statistical analysis, quantitative 
chemical analysis, chemical equilibria, electroanalytical techniques and fundamentals of 
spectroscopy. Prerequisite: CHEM 102. 
 
CHEM 315  
Biochemistry   
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Biochemistry is a general study and survey of the structure and function of biomolecules. Covered topics 
will include amino acids, peptides, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids.Lectures will 
concentrate on the chemical reactivity, biosynthesis, three-dimensional structure, and molecular 
interactions of these substances; their impact on bioenergetics, growth, and maintenance; and storage 
and transfer of genetic information. Prerequisite: CHEM 201. Corequisite: CHEM 202. 
 
CHEM 351  
Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry   
 
 
3 hours 
A study of aspects of drug design and development with focus on various classes of drugs, their 
mechanisms of action, and SAR. Prerequisites: BIO 101 and CHEM 315. 
 
CHEM 354  
Environmental Chemistry  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the chemistry of air, water, and toxic organic compounds as well as how anthropogenic 
activities affect this chemistry on Earth. The sources, reactions, transport, effects, and fates of 
chemical species found in air and water as well as the effects of technology on them will be studied. 
Broad categories in this course include Atmospheric Chemistry and Air Pollution, Climate Change 
and Energy, Water Chemistry and Water Pollution, and Toxic Organic Compounds. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 102. 
 
CHEM 445 
 Research in Chemistry  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Research focused on a specific project with specific goals related to the chemical sciences. This 
course may be taken up to two (2) times for up to six (6) credit hours. Prerequisite: CHEM 102. 
 

 
Christian Education 
 
CE 201  
Introduction to Christian Education 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to Christian Education and its procedures in the present church school, involving a brief 
survey of the historical perspectives; studies of contemporary philosophies and psychological theories of 
learning; curriculum resources, and equipment. 
 
CE 301  
Church Administration  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A functional study of administrative strategies in mapping, supporting, evaluating, and promoting the 
work of the local church consistent with a biblical worldview and denominational structure and program. 
Attention will be given to the administration of human, physical, and financial resources, and the role of 
the church administrator as a servant leader. 
 
CE 305  
Worship Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of historical and contemporary approaches in worship practices. 
Students are introduced to biblical and theological models for planning worship in the local church as well 
as their applications. Emphasis is given to the exploration of the student’s particular worship tradition 
within an ecumenical framework. Students have opportunities to critique and design worship liturgies and 
reflect on outside observations of worship traditions and practices. 
 
CE 310  
Teaching in the Church 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course orients the student to various teaching strategies designed to assist in the communication of 
Scripture. A variety of models of teaching will be explored. Approaches to teaching in a variety of settings 
will be introduced. 
 
CE 315  
Lay Leadership in the Church  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course addresses the nature of lay ministry within the local church. It addresses the function of lay 
leaders. The student will construct a theology of lay leadership, determine desired characteristics and 
qualities of leaders, and make application of leadership principles to the ministry of the local church. 
 
CE 400  
Family Ministry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course addresses the nature and needs of children, youth, and adults in family units and family 
systems. Theological perspectives on the family and family ministry will be considered. Methods and 
topics for effective ministry through the local church will be studied. 
 
CE 410  
Teaching and Learning in the Online Classroom 
 
 
3 hours 
Best practices in teaching in the online classroom are examined in light of current and developing issues 
and trends in online learning. Teaching techniques and courseware designs that foster a community of 
learning in a web-based context are emphasized. The development of online classrooms to meet the 
learning needs in public school, higher education, and church education settings is explored. 
 
CE 405  
Women’s Ministry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to the field of women’s studies this course will provide opportunities for learners to 
examine and analyze women in Scripture and Church history as well as integrate concepts and practices of 
women ministering to women. General topics of study are: the place of women in the Christian faith, the 
role of women in ministry, and building an effective women’s ministry in the local church. 
 
 
 

 
CE 445  
Studies in Christian Education  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Study of special topics of interest in Christian education with the topic changing each time the course is 
offered. 
 
Christian Missions 
 
CM 101  
Spanish for Ministry I  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces students to Spanish culture and language through a combination of text, online 
resources and classroom instruction.  Equal emphasis is placed on developing skills in areas of grammar, 
reading, and speaking this increasingly important language. (Cross listed as SPAN 101 and MDV 571M) 
 
CM 102  
Spanish for Ministry II  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course continues the practice of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills that are taught in CM 
101. (Cross listed as SPAN 102 and MDV 572M) 
 
CM 202  
Spanish for Ministry III  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an integrated study of the language and cultures of the Spanish-speaking world.  Accuracy 
in oral, aural, reading, and writing skills will stressed as a means to expression and comprehension of the 
language.  (Cross listed as SPAN 201 and MDV 573M) Prerequisite: CM 102 or equivalent. 
 
CM 203  
Spanish for Ministry IV  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course continues the integrated study of the Spanish language and culture. (Cross listed as SPAN 202 
and MDV 574M)  Prerequisite: CM 202 or equivalent.  
 
CM 201  
Introduction to Christian Missions 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a survey of the study of Christian missions. It is designed for those wanting to know more 
about Christian ministry in other cultures. It also serves as a foundation for other mission courses and 
equips students to teach missions in a local church. 
 
CM 205  
History of Christian Missions  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A historical survey of missions from Pentecost to the present day, with emphasis on the strategies and 
events that have assisted and hindered the progress of missions. 
 
CM 206  
Survey of World Religions 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey course which introduces students to the origin, history, basic tenets, and worldview of the major 
religious traditions of the world.   
 
CM 210  
The Biblical Basis of Missions  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will examine the mission teachings of both the Old and New Testaments. Emphasis will be 
given to the biblical nature and task of worldwide outreach. 
 
CM 225  
Perspectives on Christian Missions 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a survey of modern mission’s methods and issues enlightened by relevant historical and 
biblical reference in the Perspectives on the World Christian Movement: A Reader and its companion 
volume, Perspectives on the World Christian Movement: The Study Guide. Four specific perspectives of the 
modern missionary movements (the Biblical Perspective, the Historical Perspective, the Cultural 
Perspective, and the Strategic Perspective) will be utilized in this survey approach. 
 

 
CM 300  
Introduction to Short-Term Missions  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to prepare a student for a short-term, intercultural ministry experience. This 
course integrates intercultural skills, training, and practical application contextualized for specific cultural 
settings. An approved short-term mission trip or an approved individualized experience in intercultural 
ministry will serve as the capstone requirement of the course. 
 
CM 301  
Evangelism and Church Growth 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a study in the biblical, historical, and practical concepts of evangelism with special emphasis 
on the motives and methods of personal evangelism. It provides an analytical study and application of 
church growth theory and strategy within the context of the local congregation. 
 
CM 305  
Current Trends in Missions 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course addresses the current and developing trends which impact the development and 
implementation of intercultural and international Christian missions and ministry within the global and 
local church. 
 
CM 310  
The Church Engaging Postmodernity  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines philosophical, sociological, cultural, and theological issues which impact ministry as 
the church enters a postmodern context. It explores the nature, philosophy, and theology of 
postmodernity and anticipates possible strategies/methods available to the local church for effective 
ministry in this context. 
 
CM 401  
Principles of Missionary Service 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to prepare the student for an effective ministry in the cross-cultural context. 
Emphasis will be given to preparation for cross-cultural service, adaptations, adjustments, interpersonal 
relationships, ministry possibilities, and methodologies of effective outreach. 
 
CM 445  
Studies in Christian Missions  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide an in-depth look at the task of world missions. Short-term mission trips 
and/or comprehensive readings on the task of world missions will serve as the core of this course. 
 
CM 446  
World Religions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A course which introduces students to various major religious traditions of the world.  This course will 
provide a phenomenological approach and overview of these religions, including their emergence, core 
beliefs, and practices, and their philosophical understandings in order to understand and engage their 
adherents. 
 
CM 447  
Practicum in Missionary Service 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an independent study which permits the student to explore and receive firsthand experience 
within an intercultural/international context. This involvement allows the student to serve and develop 
missionary experience in an environment that offers both support and strict supervision by a qualified and 
experience missionary mentor in the chosen area of ministry. 
 
Christian Religious Studies 
 
CRS 101 
Biblical Literacy 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course improves biblical literacy by addressing the major themes of the Old and New Testaments, 
noting the changing historical and cultural contexts in which the Holy Scripture were written. Intellectual 

 
engagement, informed conversation, and appreciation of diverse contemporary faith affirmations are 
expected. 
 
CRS 102 
Christian Thought 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course engages Christian ideals expressed in the broad intellectual traditions of Christian thought 
through analysis of primary and secondary texts from significant writers and movements of the second 
century A.D. to contemporary times. Gaining appreciation for and articulation of Christian faith and 
practice in its historic and diverse expression is expected. 
 
Church History 
 
CH 201 Introduction to Church History 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A general survey of the historical development of Christianity from the time of the early Christian church 
until the modern period. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
CH 401 General Baptist Heritage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is a study of the origin and history of the General Baptist denomination with its distinctive doctrines, 
emphases, ethics, and polity. Particular attention is directed toward the denomination’s broader 
theological heritage as a Baptist group with Arminian perspectives. (Required of all General Baptist 
ministers attending OCU regardless of the major area of study) 
 
CH 410 History of American Christianity 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a general survey of the history of Christianity in America from its beginnings in the 17th 
century to the present. Critical issues in the more general field of American religious history will also be 
explored. 
 
CH 445 Studies in Church History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Study of special topics of interest in church history with the topic changing each time the course is 
offered. 
 
Communication 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for communication courses 
or permission of the instructor. 
 
COMM 202 
Fundamentals of Speech 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes a study of the fundamental characteristics of effective oral communication designed 
to help students express themselves clearly and succinctly in both formal and informal speaking 
situations. 
 
COMM 215 
Introduction to Strategic Communication 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course reviews the theories and processes of strategic communication and its practice by business, 
government, politicians, and nonprofits in domestic and international arenas. It also highlights the use of 
theory to provide an in-depth understanding of planning, executing and evaluating strategic 
communication plans. 
 
 
 

 
COMM 220 
Mass Media 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An overview of the history, philosophy, operation, and societal impact of print and electronic media 
including books, newspapers, magazines, motion pictures, recordings, radio, and television. 
 
COMM 230 
Interpersonal Communication  
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will learn and develop the skills needed for effective interpersonal communication. Areas of 
study include perception, verbal and nonverbal messages, listening, and relationship development. This 
course will also include foundational principles related to conflict resolution, ethical persuasion, and 
navigation of the increasingly complex relational landscape of the 21st century. 
 
COMM 301 
Communication Theory and Research Methods 
 
 
3 hours 
Introduction to theory and research in the field of mass media. Examines the role of mass media in 
modern society and the influence of media institutions and messages on individuals, communities, and 
society. Includes an overview of basic research methods associated with media research. Students 
integrate theoretical knowledge into media research areas relevant to communication professionals today. 
Prerequisite: COMM 202 or permission of instructor. 
 
COMM 310 
On Campus Practicum  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course involves performing various responsibilities—interviewing, researching, writing, 
editing, proofreading, and formatting visually the articles, headlines, and pictures in the campus 
newspaper for a semester. May be repeated three times for credit. 
 
COMM 325 
Intercultural Communication  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will learn and develop the skills needed for effective interpersonal communication.  
Examines the communication process of individuals from different cultures or subcultures. Explores 
possible sources of misunderstandings in intercultural communication (e.g., time/space factors, linguistic 
and nonverbal factors, ethnocentric communication, communication problems of persons engaged in 
personal or professional intercultural contacts). Prerequisite: COMM 202 or permission of instructor. 
 
COMM 340 
Persuasion and Strategic Communication 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will focus on persuasive writing and messaging in the context of strategic communication. 
Students will review several of the prominent persuasion theories and models and examine the message, 
audience, and situational characteristics that influence the success of persuasive efforts. Topics will include 
grammar basics, audience considerations, credibility and ethics, and documentation style. Prerequisite: 
COMM 202 and COMM 215 or permission of instructor. 
 
COMM 401 
Advanced Speech 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course builds on the foundation of the public speaking skills developed in COMM 202 and is 
designed to challenge students to refine those skills. Prerequisite: COMM 202 or consent of instructor. 
 
COMM 415 
 On Campus Practicum in Editing  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course involves editing the campus newspaper: The Collegian and being the editor in charge for two 
issues for a semester. Other duties include newspaper format, developing story ideas, story selection, 
reporter assignments, proofreading, formatting articles, and exporting articles into the newspaper. 
 
 
 

 
COMM 440 
Internship in Communication  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The primary purpose of the internship is to provide the student an opportunity to enhance his/her 
academic background and life experiences in a practical and reflective way as an intern in a 
communication or other related organization. Prerequisite: COMM 202 and junior standing. 
 
Computer Science 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for computer sciences courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
CS 100 Introduction to Computer Science and Creative Technologies   
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the basics in the field of computer science and the fundamentals of computer 
programming. The course presents an overview of selected topics in computing, such as networking and 
databases, and teaches the essential ideas of Computer Science for a zero-prior-experience audience. 
CS100 is specifically designed for students with no prior programming experience and touches upon a 
variety of fundamental topics. Also, the course introduces students to the Creative Technologies major 
and to the skills and processes utilized throughout the major. Basic concepts of creativity, innovation, low 
fidelity prototyping, agile project management, and rapid iteration of designs will also be introduced. 
Same as CRT 100. Prerequisites: None 
 
CS 103 Creative Computing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to the fundamentals of computing and programming in the context of computer 
graphics, animation, digital sound, and interactivity. Explores the use of computation as a creative medium 
while developing fundamental ideas and technique of programming, computational problem solving, 
algorithms, and date representation. Same as CRT 100. Prerequisites: None 
 
CS 104 Internet History, Technology, and Security 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
To thrive in today's digital world, you need to understand the system that powers it. This course, built in 
collaboration with Google, will explore the internet and show you how it works. This class focuses on 
hands-on learning of important topics like cybersecurity, networking, and programming. By the end, you'll 
be able to evaluate your options for a rewarding career in technology. At minimum, you'll be a much wiser 
network citizen. This online class has optional live sessions. Prerequisites: None 
 
CS 111 Programming for Everyone I  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course, built in collaboration with Google, provides a gentle, but thorough, introduction to 
programming using Python. You will learn the core concepts and techniques needed to create programs 
and perform basic data analysis. By the end of this course, you'll be ready to pursue further study in 
computer science and unlock more advanced programming courses. This online class has optional live 
sessions. Prerequisites: None 
 
CS 125 Programming for Everyone II  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course, built in collaboration with Google, follows on from Programming for Everyone I. In the first 
half of the course, you will learn how to leverage your Python skills to treat the internet as a source of 
data. The second half of the course will teach you the fundamentals of Structured Query Language (SQL) 
and database design. By the end of the course, you will improve your programming skills and learn how 
to build a range of applications. This online class has optional live sessions. Prerequisites: CS 111 
 

CS 200 Web Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course, built in collaboration with Google, covers everything you need to know in order to build a 
website from scratch. You'll learn HTML, CSS and Javascript - the core technologies which power modern 
websites - and build a website of your own. By the end of this course, you'll be able to create interactive, 
aesthetically pleasing websites for any purpose you can imagine. This online class has optional live 
sessions. Prerequisites: CS 125 and MATH 115. 
 
CS 225 Introduction to C—How Computers Really Work 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course, built in collaboration with Google, covers everything you need to know in order to build a 
website from scratch. You'll learn HTML, CSS and Javascript - the core technologies which power modern 
websites - and build a website of your own. By the end of this course, you'll be able to create interactive, 
aesthetically pleasing websites for any purpose you can imagine. This online class has optional live 
sessions.Prerequisites: CS 125 and MATH 115. 
 
CS 230 Inside of a Microprocessor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is intended as an introduction to computer hardware and builds upon Introduction to C. It 
covers the techniques used to design and build microprocessors, memory, and other elements of 
modern-day hardware. Students will learn the fundamentals of machine language (binary) and assembly 
language as well as what happens inside of a computer on a fundamental level. Students will also have 
the opportunity to analyze the C compiler and learn how it produces the necessary strings of ones and 
zeros that will run on the hardware. This online class has optional live sessions. 
Prerequisites: CS 225 and MATH 125. 
 
CS 300 Application Development I—Exploring Web Applications 
 
 
3 hours 
Modern development relies on frameworks which provide developers with powerful tools to speed up 
development. If you want to build apps, you need to understand how to use frameworks. This course, 
which has been built in collaboration with Google, will introduce you to Django - a framework used for 
data-driven web applications. You'll learn the fundamentals of Django, improve your database 
management skills, and begin developing your own apps. This online class has optional live sessions. 
Prerequisites: CS 125 
 
CS 311 Data Structures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course, built in collaboration with Google, will teach you how to understand and use data structures. 
Data structures are used by almost every program and application to store, access and modify the vast 
quantities of data that are needed by modern software. By the end of this course you'll learn what data 
structures are and learn how to use them in the applications you build. This online course has optional live 
sessions. Prerequisites: CS 125 
 
CS 351 Application Development II—Building Web Applications 
 
 
3 hours 
This course - built in collaboration with Google - is the second part of the application development series. 
In this course, you will put your skills into practice and build your own application. By the end of this 
course, you'll have a greater understanding of the technologies that power modern apps and be able to 
build your own. This online course has optional live sessions. Prerequisites: CS 300. CS 200 
(recommended concurrent) 
 
 
 
 
 
CS 400 Algorithms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers general introductory concepts in the design and implementation of distributed 
systems. This course studies basic principles behind distributed systems (collections of independent 
components that appear to users as a single coherent system) and reviews main paradigms used to 
organize them. The course focuses on the fundamental concepts and working details of distributed 
systems and the underlying technologies. Prerequisites: CS 311 and MATH 115 
 
CS 425 Product Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Creating software products is more than just writing code, it also requires an analysis of what your 
customers want, and how to meet their needs. As a result, understanding product development is key to a 
successful career in technology. By the end of this course (built in collaboration with Google), you will 
understand how product teams and processes work, and learn how to develop an idea into an actual 
product that delights your users. This online class has optional live sessions.Prerequisites: Junior Status 
 
CS 480 Capstone Project—Product Launch 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is intended as a culmination of all of a student's work in their Computer Science major. 
Students will work in groups to launch a web app prototype that meets the following requirements: 
1. Uses Database concepts from the Computer Science Core, Data Structures, and Algorithms. 
2. Meets faculty approval. 
Student will pitch their product, select the necessary technologies, work in groups to build an application, 
and create a webpage from which the application can be accessed. Students will be evaluated based on 
whether their product meets the goals they initially established, and on their internal project management 
processes. This online class has optional live sessions. 
Prerequisites: Senior Status. CS 351, CS 400, CS 425, MATH 115, MATH 125, MATH 212 must be 
completed. CS 425 can be taken concurrently. 
Creative Technologies 
 
CRT 100 
Introduction to Computer Science and Creative Technologies  
3 hours 
This course explores the creative use of technology. It introduces students to the emerging field of 
creative technology, enabling students to build products that solve pressing social, community and 
creative problems. Students will explore applications of creative technology to develop and deliver a 
cohesive product that achieves given specifications while taking into consideration audience, suitable 
technology and interactive design components. 
  
CRT 101 
Introduction to Prototyping 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course highlights practical skills and basic theoretical concepts in the design process including 
product-design oriented innovation, creativity, human-centered design thinking and prototyping. The 
prototyping will be accomplished using hands-on projects built using digital fabrication tools like 3-D 
Printers and laser cutters. 
 
CRT 103 
Creative Computing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to the fundamentals of computing and programming in the context of computer 
graphics, animation, digital sound, and interactivity. Explores the use of computation as a creative medium 
while developing fundamental ideas and technique of programming, computational problem solving, 
algorithms, and date representation. 
 
 
 

CRT 205 
Physical Computing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers microcontroller programming for prototyping physical systems that incorporate 
sensors, displays and actuators. It introduces students to fundamentals of physical computing to design 
and build interactive objects and environments using sensors, actuators and microcontrollers. It explores 
techniques for creating richly interactive experiences using computationally enabled devices. 
Prerequisite:  CRT 103 or permission of instructor.  
 
CRT 210 
Practical Electronics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to analog and digital electronics with a focus on practical applications.  Topics include 
basic DC and AC circuits, diodes, transistors, operational amplifiers, integrated circuits and electronics 
safety. 
 
CRT 260 
Introduction to 3D Modeling  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to computer-aided design (CAD) and 3D modeling, specifically aimed at making 3D 
printed design. Topics include core concepts behind CAD, basics of geometry creation, generative design, 
3D modeling techniques, and 3D printing preparation through a series of lectures and hands-on projects. 
The CAD software students will explore is Autodesk Fusion 360. 
 
CRT 310 
Innovation & Commercialization 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Explores transforming innovations into commercial products and services. Students assess technology-
based inventions for their commercial potential in terms of licensing and/or for venture development and 
provide written reports of their findings. Additional topics include preparing documentation and 
instructions for contract manufacturers and other outsourced service providers. 
 
CRT 320 
Programmable Logic Controllers & Robotics  
 
 
3 hours 
Introduction to Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) including PLC programming, connections, 
installation and start-up procedures. Other topics include timers and counters, relay logic instructions, 
and hardware and software applications. Also explores basic robotic concepts including 
robot classification, power sources, robot applications in the workplace, robot control techniques, path 
control, end of arm tooling, robot operation and robot controllers, controller architecture in a system, 
robotic language programming, and human interface issues. Taught cooperatively with Georgia 
Northwestern Technical College robots lab and PLC lab. Prerequisite: CRT 205 or permission of 
instructor.  
 
CRT 420 
Special Topics in Creative Technologies 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Highlights current developments in creative technologies. Emphasis on the understanding and ability to 
utilize recent technological developments in practical applications and individual student projects. May be 
retaken provided topic differs. Prerequisite: CRT 101 or permission of instructor. 
 
CRT 440 
Technology Internship  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Student will work in a professional setting under a faculty member who provides guidance and works 
with student and on-site work supervisor to integrate work experiences and the student’s educational and 
professional goals. Prerequisites: CRT 210, CRT 310, & CRT 320 or permission of instructor.  
 
CRT 450 
Design Project Capstone 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to familiarize students with career opportunities in Creative Technologies with a 
special emphasis on career planning and portfolio development.  Students must complete a self-

published portfolio for use in their job search and Creative Technologies program assessment.  Highly 
recommended to be taken during the first semester of a student’s senior year. 
 
Criminal Justice 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for criminal justice courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 101  
Introduction to Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Views crime and crime control in historical and societal context. Explores the extent of crime and its 
impact on modern society. Explores causes of crime and the development and operation of the criminal 
justice system. Explores the police, court, and correction systems. 
 
CJ 102  
Introduction to Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introductory to Law Enforcement designed to provide students with an understanding of 
law enforcement principles and practices in the 21st century. The course provides comprehensive overview 
of Law Enforcement, Law Enforcement organizations – operations and conduct, and policing in the 21st 
century. 
 
CJ 105  
Community Policing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Explores how community policing is both a philosophy and an organizational strategy that allows police 
and community residents to work closely together in new ways to solve the problems of crime, fear of 
crime, physical and social disorders, and neighborhood decay. 
 
CJ 110  
Juvenile Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the juvenile justice system in the United States. Areas examined will be the role of 
the juvenile courts, the role of police agencies, and the role of correctional agencies. The course will focus 
on current issues involving juveniles within the correctional system and the overarching needs of society. 
 
CJ 118  
Introduction to Courts  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An examination of the basic structure of the court system and court process is examined. Current trends 
of the court system are explored and discussed. 
 
CJ 125  
Statistics in Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Basic course covering topics of: collection, organization and summarization of data; basic probability; 
probability distributions; sampling distributions; confidence intervals; and tests of hypothesis. (Same as 
PSY 125 and SOC 125.) Prerequisite: MATH 110 or higher.  
 
CJ 150  
Alternatives to Incarceration  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An examination of recent trends in corrections focusing on the recent trend towards community-based 
corrections programs and the need to consider the victims of crime as part of the sentencing process. The 
following programs will be examined: probation, parole and other early release programs, diversion, drug 
and alcohol treatment, halfway houses, mediation, restitution, community service, house arrest, and 
electronic monitoring. 
 
CJ 201  
Criminal Law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An in-depth study of crime, law, and punishment with particular emphasis on the substantive provisions 
of criminal law that define the elements of various crimes and the parties to those crimes. There will be an 

 
overview of the criminal justice system focusing on the constitutional and statutory framework for the 
judicial branch of government. There will also be an evaluation of the public policy concerns and issues 
resulting from the tension between society’s legitimate interest in punishing certain conduct and the 
individual’s constitutionally protected rights of liberty. Prerequisite: CJ 101 or permission of the 
instructor. 
 
CJ 202  
Criminal Procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An in-depth study of crime, law, and punishment with particular emphasis on criminal procedures 
including search and seizure, arrest, and the criminal trial. There will be an overview of the entire criminal 
court system, but the focus will be on issues such as the rights of the accused before and during the trial, 
process, victim’s rights, sentencing, and appeal rights. Recent United States Supreme Court decisions as 
well as other relevant cases will be analyzed. Prerequisite: CJ 201 or permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 215  
Introduction to Criminology 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Past and present theories exploring the causes of crime and examined in the context of how to deal with 
crime and criminals in our society. Criminal behavior causes, sociological and psychological, are examined. 
(Same as SOC 215.) 
 
CJ 275  
Ethical Issues in CJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An exploration of the value and importance of ethical behavior within the criminal justice system. They will 
examine how ethical behavior has to be used when dealing with people (offenders, officers, counselors, 
lawyers, judges) no matter their current position in the criminal justice system. 
 
CJ 292  
Terrorism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An in-depth analysis of terrorism as a political weapon, defining terrorism, examining the causes of 
terrorism, precepts of domestic and international terrorism, and the religious foundations of terrorism as 
well as examine the potential for terrorism locally, in the region, state, and nation. 
 
CJ 299  
Topics in Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Examines various issues in the criminal justice field; topics may include challenges to adjudication, 
international law as it relates to criminal activity, foreign policy, etc. 
 
CJ 301  
Introduction to Forensic Science 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Overview of general principles of forensic science, techniques, equipment, and methodologies as used in 
crime laboratories, Focus on fingerprint and firearm identification, trace evidence, (hair, fiber, paint, glass), 
blood, DNA evidence, forensic documentation examination, crime scene kits and forensic microscopy. 
Prerequisite: CJ 101 
 
CJ 302  
Criminal Investigation  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide the skills and knowledge necessary to conduct a thorough preliminary 
investigation of crimes. Techniques used to investigate common categories of crimes will be discussed.  A 
major emphasis in this course will be the preparation and execution of investigative plans as they relate to 
a team approach.  Other skills will include interviewing, crime scene processing, and basic forensic 
examination of evidence. Prerequisite: CJ 101 or permission of the instructor.  
 
CJ 308  
Investigative Photography 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to investigative photography, including selection and use of digital 
equipment, the theory of basic photographic techniques and image formation, the use of photographs as 

 
evidence, close-up photography work, and common investigative photography misconceptions. The 
course utilizes “hands-on” instruction with an emphasis on crime scene and evidence photography. 
Prerequisite: CJ 101 and junior standing. 
 
CJ 310  
Victimology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Theories and history shaping the bio-psycho-social and environmental characteristics of crime and violent 
victimization are examined with emphasis on their intersection with issues of race, gender, class, ethnicity, 
and sexual orientation. 
 
CJ 311  
Principles of Security  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An overview of the field of security. The course will discuss the role and development of security, its 
applications, and its relationships to society. It will present a total picture of security to include personnel, 
safety, fire, administration, access controls, and physical and information security. 
 
CJ 315  
Conflict Management in Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will examine the nature of conflict and individual and group decision making processes. It will 
explore ways to minimize destructive consequences of conflict as well as identifying and negotiating 
solutions to problems that occur in a correctional setting. Prerequisite: CJ 101 or permission of the 
instructor.  
 
CJ 320  
Police Administration and Organization 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Introduces the basic organization structures of law enforcement patrol and administration. Principles of 
command, unity of command, span of control, evaluation of promotion, etc., will also be discussed. 
 
CJ 323  
Basics of Crime Scene Investigation 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
This course covers basic considerations, guidelines, and procedures that help in the investigation of crime 
scenes so that field investigators do not avoid oversight, ensure thoroughness of the search, and comply 
with both the legal and scientific requirements pertaining to the use of physical evidence. The course 
utilizes a practical hands-on approach to evidence identification, documentation, collection and handling 
of evidence from the crime scene. This course includes lab study designed to reinforce important forensic 
and investigative skills. Prerequisite: CJ 302 or permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 325  
Drugs and Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction into how drugs are related to crime looking at the variety of connections including the 
possession, manufacture, and distribution of drugs. Exploring the relationship of crime to the effects they 
have on the user’s behavior and the generating violence and other illegal activity in connection with drug 
trafficking. 
 
CJ 330  
Report Writing for Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines how to write clear, accurate and grammatically correct reports used in law 
enforcement and correctional settings. Other criminal justice-based communication instruments, such as 
note taking, field interviewing, spelling of key criminal justice terminology, and court testimony will be 
addressed. Prerequisite: CJ 101 or permission of the instructor.  
 
CJ 400  
Offender Assessment System  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course will examine the criminal classification of offenders; prediction of criminal behavior; and 
rehabilitation of specific types of offenders. The topics will be examined from both clinical and research 
perspectives. Potential topics may include human aggression; assessing dangerousness; borderline 

 
personality disorder; risk factors in physical and sexual assault of adults and children; and offender 
treatment programs. Prerequisite: CJ 150 or permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 410  
Probation and Parole  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An examination of the functions of probation and parole officers. The theoretical and practical aspects of 
probation and parole will be examined in depth. Prerequisite: CJ 150 or permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 415  
Criminological Theory  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on the major theoretical explanations for crime and delinquency. 
 
CJ 420  
Correctional Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Covers the organization, supervision, and administration of officers and inmates and techniques used in 
institutions. Legal trends concerning the rights of prisoners will be discussed.  
 
CJ 423  
Advanced Crime Scene Investigation  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course steeped in application of advanced crime scene techniques including identification, collection, 
and processing techniques. Students will be challenged with advanced theories and methodologies 
pertaining to proper crime scene assessment, search, and acquisition of various types of evidence. As 
such, an in-depth, hands on approach with laboratory activities and simulations will serve to engage 
students at a critical level beyond mere lecture-based contemplation.  Prerequisite: CJ 323 or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 424  
Applied Forensic Science 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An immersive course combining relevant forensic evidence analyses with theoretical discussion. Based on 
this formula, students will spend a majority of class time employing modern techniques for evidence 
analysis and focusing on result interpretation and the impact of analytical outcomes. Students will also 
become familiar with the strengths and weaknesses of the various forms of evidence analysis employed 
and will be able to critically assess these means of criminal resolution in the hopes of helping to improve 
future scientific endeavors within this field of investigation.  
 
CJ 430  
Community Corrections 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course focuses on probation, parole, and other intermediate sanctions and community treatment 
options. Each is examined from both punishment and treatment model perspectives. 
 
CJ 440  
Contemporary Criminal Justice Topics  
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will explore selected issues, topics, and current events not covered in depth in other CJ courses. 
Other areas of study include multiculturalism, gang violence, etc. Emphasis is on individualized study and 
group discussions.  
 
CJ 441  
Comparative Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines issues related to crime throughout the world. The student will identify, analyze and 
compare the criminal justice systems in the U.S. with those of other countries. This course will explain the 
basic worldwide philosophies of law and justice, the arrangements for crime prevention and law 
enforcement, and the methods of selecting judges and juries around the world. 
 
CJ 445  
Studies in Criminal Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Studies a current topic in Criminal Justice. 
 

 
CJ 448  
Medicolegal Investigation of Death 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an in-depth look into the medico-legal aspects of death investigation, including the 
manners, mechanisms, and causes of death, as well as the post mortem changes.  The course also 
instructs the student on wound interpretation and the method to apply post mortem conditions to 
criminal investigations to confirm or refute evidence of wrongful deaths. Prerequisite: CJ 302 or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
CJ 495  
Criminal Justice Internship 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The primary purpose of the internship is to provide the student an opportunity to enhance his/her 
academic background and life experiences via practical work exposure as an intern in an organization 
associated with the criminal justice system. Prerequisite: CJ 101, successful completion of 30 hours in 
criminal justice courses, and successful completion of 74 hours or more. 
 
CJ 496  
Criminal Justice Practicum 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The purpose of the practicum is to foster student research or literature review through on-campus work 
experience in a Criminal Justice-focused research or instructional setting or by means of an in-field, 
practical research experiment under the direction of a full-time faculty member or department head. 
Prerequisite: CJ 101, successful completion of 30 hours in criminal justice courses, and successful 
completion of 74 hours or more. 
 
CJ 498  
Criminal Justice Capstone Seminar 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The capstone course focuses on applying major criminal justice theories that have contributed to an 
understanding of deviant, delinquent, or abnormal behaviors and crime. Emphasis is placed on the 
student’s understanding of how the principle of each theory may be used to evaluate the primary 
elements of the justice system. The capstone course provides senior-level students with the opportunity 
to demonstrate that they can successfully analyze, evaluate, and interpret issues, problems and policies 
confronting the justice system through a critical thinking, problem based process. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of the criminal justice core courses and successful completion of 90 hours or 
more. 
 
Early Childhood 
 
EC 210  Introduction to Early Childhood Profession 
 
 
  
 
3 hours 
Provides an introduction to the profession of Early Childhood Education. Examines early childhood 
philosophy, historical perspective, goals, and implementation of play theory, special needs, 
curriculum, and regulations. This course addresses developmentally appropriate practices for 
children ages birth through 8 years old. (Same as EDUC 210.) 
 
EC 215  Health, Safety & Nutrition 
 
 
 
 
 
  
3 hours 
This course examines the health, safety and nutrition needs of infants through school-age children. It 
focuses on implementing effective, preventative classroom practices to help children and families build a 
healthy lifestyle. It will examine topics including vaccinations, obesity, dental health, chronic and acute 
health conditions, fire safety, environmental issues and mental health. Participants will learn how to 
include activities in their daily lesson planning as well as share information and education to families they 
will work with in the future. 
 
 
 

 
EC 225  
Early Childhood Emerging Literacy and Math Concepts 
 
3 hours 
Through course readings, lectures presentations, group discussions, independent research and 
observations, as well as, small projects, candidates will gain an understanding of the development of early 
childhood language and math concepts and teaching strategies. Candidates will explore emerging 
research-based strategies that will support and guide young children in the development of language 
acquisition and math problem solving. Candidates will develop activities that encourage manipulatives to 
be used to provide hands-on and active learning lessons in both the literacy and math content 
areas. Micro-teaching and self-evaluation will provide the candidate with reflection and observation 
opportunities that help improve their professional growth and understanding of his/her impact on 
student learning.  
 
EC 242  Early Childhood Curriculum I   
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will examine the principles and practices involved in planning, implementing and 
evaluating developmentally appropriate, evidence-based curriculum for children ages birth to 8 
years old. The course focuses on and considers the importance of play in curriculum design and on 
relationships among development theory, philosophy, and practice and the needs and interests of young 
children including those who are culturally, linguistically and ability diverse. 
 
EC 285  Infants and Toddlers   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will explore infants and toddler development through course readings, lectures and 
presentations, group discussions, independent research, and small group projects. This class 
focuses on developing infant and toddler child/daycare resources with an emphasis on, safety, 
equipment, health and nutritional needs, psychological needs, and parental needs. The cognitive, 
affective, and psychomotor aspects of learning will be approached. Students shall develop an 
understanding of consultation and interdisciplinary techniques. The students will learn to be a facilitator 
and conveyor of knowledge and cultural heritage in order to provide better services for infants, toddlers, 
and families. Field experience is required. 
 
EC 313  Child Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Studies the physical, social, emotional, cognitive, and moral development of children from 
conception to age eight. Theories of child development, biological and environmental foundations, 
prenatal development, the birth process, and the newborn baby are discussed. Influences of family, 
community, media, and culture in various countries are considered. Students may be required to complete 
observations and field experiences with children as related to this course. 
 
EC 341  Early Childhood Programs and Management   
 
 
3 hours 
Provides for an understanding of Early Childhood programs, their design, budgeting, facility 
management, and other practical applications. Classroom routines, transitions, and behavior 
management will be explored. Participants will observe and interview a director of a childcare 
facility or ministry as well as the owner of a licensed childcare home. 
 
EC 342  Early Childhood Curriculum II   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will explore various global curriculum models and underlying theories utilized in designing 
early childhood programs. Participants will examine factors which have influenced curriculum 
development in the field of early childhood and determine how certain factors have influenced the 
development of a variety of models which have shaped present curriculum for young children. 
 
 
 

 
EC 360  Early Childhood Math Concepts & Manipulatives  
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will explore the teaching of mathematics through active participation in micro-teaching, 
completions of peer and self-evaluations, and teaching in the pre-K environment. Investigation of the 
development of mathematics concepts in the education of young children, emphasizing methods of 
teaching, special needs adaptations, and use of instructional manipulatives as materials. Field experience 
is required. 
 
EC 405   
Families in Transition   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This class will examine the make-up of today’s diverse families and the multiple influences that 
impact children’s development. Analyzes the importance of developing reciprocal relationships 
with families and communities in support of children’s learning. Explores professional and ethical 
standards related to working with children, families, leading to informed advocacy for children, families 
and the profession. Students may be required to complete observations and field experiences with 
children as related to this course. 
 
EC 438  Field Experience in Early Childhood 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The student will experience teaching in an early childhood setting under the guidance of an experienced 
teacher. The student will work in a cooperative situation with the classroom teacher. The student will have 
the opportunity to work with children on an individual and small group basis. The student will observe the 
methods and techniques of the classroom teacher, assist the classroom teacher in planning and 
preparation of subject matter, and teach lessons to children. The student will assist the classroom teacher 
in developing materials or completing tasks as needed. The student will have, if possible, the opportunity 
to meet the parents and work with them. These experiences may occur in a variety of settings; dependent 
upon what types of placements are available but will include Licensed and NAEYC accredited Head Start, 
Corporate Childcare or Ministry, the pre-service teacher may be working with any age level from infant 
through six. 
 
Education 
 
EDUC 101 
Foundations of Education 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is the beginning of the teacher education program and an introduction to professional 
education. This included historical, philosophical, social, and psychological foundations and problems in 
teaching and teacher preparation. This course is open to all students; however, it is required for 
admission to all other courses in Education. Field experience required. 
 
EDUC 213 
Developmental Psychology 
3 hours 
Stages of growth (physical, emotional, cognitive, social, and development of children from early 
childhood through early adolescent and young adulthood will be examined in detail. Candidates are 
required to study the relationship of human growth and development as related to peer relationships 
and pressure, learning and learning styles, drugs, gender, culture, and work. 
 
EDUC 220 
Elementary Children’s Literature 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Criteria for the selection and study of literature written especially for children in elementary school; 
classical and contemporary literature enjoyed by children globally. Required of Elementary Education 
majors.  
 
 
 

 
EDUC 225   
Early Childhood Emerging Literacy and Math Concepts  
3 hours 
Through course readings, lectures presentations, group discussions, independent research and 
observations, as well as, small projects, candidates will gain an understanding of the development of 
early childhood language and math concepts and teaching strategies. Candidates will explore emerging 
research-based strategies that will support and guide young children in the development of language 
acquisition and math problem solving. Candidates will develop activities that encourage manipulatives to 
be used to provide hands-on and active learning lessons in both the literacy and math content areas. 
Micro-teaching and self-evaluation will provide the candidate with reflection and observation 
opportunities that help improve their professional growth and understanding of his/her impact on 
student learning. 
 
EDUC 230 
 Assessment of Student Learning  
2 hours 
Formative and summative assessment procedures are studied as well as quantitative and qualitative 
assessment. Strategies for accommodating special needs students are included. Pre- service teachers 
are expected to be able to construct a variety of tests as well as develop authentic evaluative materials. 
Candidates develop a personal philosophy of assessment.  
 
EDUC 240 
Creative Arts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Candidates are required to understand and utilize the performing and visual arts as primary media for 
communication (reading, writing, and oral language), inquiry, motivation, critical thinking, problem 
solving, and engagement among all elementary students. The integration of the arts at the elementary 
level is accomplished through knowledge and application of various art integration lessons, strategies, 
instruction and activities. 
 
EDUC 260 
Reading Across the Content Areas 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Reading problems encountered by students in middle school and high school are studied. Assessment 
of student ability, reading strategies, learning styles, and potential are covered. A field experience is 
required. Pre-service teachers will mentor small groups of students.  
 
EDUC 270 
   Secondary Education Practicum 
 
 
 
 
 2  hours    
This course focuses on real applications and experience in a secondary 7-12 school setting.  It will        
assist   the student in gaining understanding about the complexities of classroom teaching and their 
professional role as a developing, reflective practitioner. This practicum will include working with small 
groups of students, helping to write and grade assessments and teaching a number of lessons.  
Interaction with students in one-on-one, small group and large/whole group settings is crucial to the 
development of confidence, dispositions, and skills necessary to succeed on a daily lead-teaching basis. 
Students will explore how teachers make decisions and how to understand the seemingly invisible, 
countless considerations behind each choice 
 
EDUC 295    Differentiated Instruction                                                                                  3 hours  
This course will facilitate differentiated instruction as an instructional approach in meeting the 
academic, social and emotional needs at various developmental levels of all students, including 
special needs, second language and diverse populations. Topics examined include: creating student 
profiles, characteristics and dynamics of differentiated instruction; identification of techniques for 
differentiating content, process, and product; exploration of how to differentiate on the basis of 
student’s readiness, interest, and learning modalities; and reflection on one’s personal beliefs and 
practices of instruction. 
 

 
EDUC 305 
Teaching of Reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to survey current methods, materials, and research as related to the teaching of 
reading. The elements of phonics are studied. This course presents the foundations of reading skills as 
well as the study of developmental reading and the essential reading skills in the content areas. 
 
EDUC 310 
Language Arts Methods 
3 hours 
This course will consider the role of language arts in elementary education, in terms of methodology, 
materials, theory, and practical applications in order to help the students become a facilitator and 
conveyor of knowledge and cultural heritage through language.  Elements of teaching and learning 
reading, literature, spelling, grammar and handwriting will be explored. Candidates are required to 
demonstrate proficiency in teaching areas of language arts in addition to incorporating and 
strengthening formal and informal assessment strategies in order to foster active engagement during 
learning. Includes diverse field experiences and collaboration with school and community in which 
candidates encourage the development of problem solving by constructing a variety of opportunities 
for K-6 students. As a culmination of the field experience component candidates are required to 
evaluate and reflect upon his/her teaching potential, practice in light of research, assess impact on 
student learning, and overall professional growth as related to the promotion and well-being of 
children. Students are placed in a school setting which reflects diverse populations, including low 
socio-economic status, ELL and multiple ethnicities. 
 
EDUC 312 
Corrective Reading 
3 hours 
Designed to examine current research, assessment, and methods designed to assist academically 
challenged children in attaining essential reading skills. Included are both qualitative and quantitative 
assessment procedures. Field experiences are designed to assist the pre-service teacher in developing 
skills working with children with reading problems. (Same as SPED 312.) 
 
EDUC 315 
Classroom Management 
3 hours 
Course focuses on managing classrooms from multiple perspectives which include but are not limited 
to: organization of classroom and materials, establishing rules and procedures, procedures for 
managing student work, getting off to a good start, planning and conducting instruction, managing 
cooperative learning groups, maintaining appropriate student behavior, communication skills for 
teaching, managing problem behaviors and managing special groups. Candidates demonstrate 
professional growth and reflection by constructing a classroom management plan consisting of rules, 
procedures, and consequences, writing a personal philosophy of classroom environment, and creating 
a newsletter and communication piece to collaborate between families and school. Emphasis is placed 
upon the importance of establishing and maintaining positive working relationships and the impact 
those have on the overall well-being of students.  Field Experience is required. 
 
EDUC 329 
Emerging Literacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will explore emerging literacy strategies through course readings, lectures and presentations, 
group discussions, independent research, field experience, and small projects. Provides understanding 
of the development and acquisition of language, as well as an appreciation for the ways in which 
children use language. Explores, and evaluates materials, methods, and techniques used in nurturing 
young children’s language growth. Development and sharing of self- created original big book. 
Includes diverse field experiences and collaboration with school and community in which candidates 
encourage the development of problem solving by constructing a variety of opportunities for K-6 
students. As a culmination of the field experience component candidates are required to evaluate and 

 
reflect upon his/her teaching potential, practice in light of research, assess impact on student learning, 
and overall professional growth as related to the promotion and well-being of children. 
 
EDUC 346             Secondary Education Methods                                                    
3 hours  
Covers such topics as teaching techniques, critical thinking, creativity, collaborative problem solving, 
and individualized learning in specific content areas. Candidates will explore central concepts, tools 
of inquiry, structures of the discipline(s) he or she wants to teach, and learn how to create learning 
experiences that make the discipline accessible and meaningful for secondary students.  
 
EDUC 350 
Social Studies Methods for Elementary Teachers 
3 hours 
Focuses on development of social awareness in elementary children and explores the concepts of the 
social studies, incorporating them into the curriculum, with emphasis on planning and implementing 
teaching/learning experiences and encouraging the acquisition of these knowledge and skills in 
children through developmentally appropriate means. . Includes diverse field experiences and 
collaboration with school and community in which candidates encourage the development of problem 
solving by providing a variety of opportunities for K-6 students. As a culmination of the field 
experience component candidates are required to evaluate and reflect upon their teaching potential, 
their practice in light of research, their impact on student learning, and their overall professional 
growth as related to the promotion and well-being of children. 
 
EDUC 355 
Science Methods & Technology 
3 hours 
Course focuses on knowing, understanding, and using fundamental concepts of physical, life, and 
earth/space sciences. Candidates can design and implement age-appropriate inquiry lessons to teach 
science by utilizing hands-on, discovery learning and technology in order to build student 
understanding for personal and social applications, and to convey the nature of science in elementary 
schools.  Includes diverse field experiences and collaboration with school and community in which 
candidates encourage the development of problem solving by providing a variety of opportunities for 
K-6 students. As a culmination of the field experience component candidates are required to evaluate 
and reflect upon their teaching potential, their practice in light of research, their impact on student 
learning, and their overall professional growth as related to the promotion and well-being of children. 
 
EDUC 360 
Elementary Math Concepts & Manipulatives 
3 hours 
Investigation of the development of mathematic concepts (number and operations, algebra, geometry, 
measurement, data analysis, and probability) in the education of young children, emphasizing problem 
solving, reasoning, connections, representation, communication and methods of teaching and use of 
instructional materials, particularly manipulatives. Candidates are required to demonstrate proficiency in 
teaching areas of teaching mathematics in addition to incorporating and strengthening formal and 
informal assessment strategies in order to foster active engagement during learning. Focus on Indiana 
academic mathematics standards based lessons. . Includes diverse field experiences and collaboration 
with school and community in which candidates encourage the development of problem solving by 
providing a variety of opportunities for K-6 students.  As a culmination of the field experience component 
candidates are required to evaluate and reflect upon their teaching potential, their practice in light of 
research, their impact on student learning, and their overall professional growth as related to the 
promotion and well-being of children. 
 
EDUC 418 
Seminar in Education                                                                       
 2 hours               
The pre-service teacher is required to develop an autobiography and review a philosophy of education. 
Pre-service teachers will study legal issues, classroom management, collaborative learning techniques, 

 
lesson plan development, assessment of student academic performance, and parent-teacher 
conferences. The course provides ongoing opportunities for professional development of teacher 
education candidates in a variety of topics before and during their student teaching experiences. Topics 
include but are not limited to legal issues, classroom management, lesson plan development, and 
community involvement. 
 
EDUC 421 
 Secondary Student Teaching (5-12)                                       
   10 hours  
The pre-service teacher is expected to complete a minimum of ten (10 weeks) of student teaching at the 
secondary school developmental (5-12) level. The pre-service teacher is expected to develop lessons, work 
as a team member, develop a unit, manage students, assess student performance, and complete any tasks 
expected of a teacher. 
 
EDUC 424 
 Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)                                                      10 hours 
The pre-service teacher is expected to complete a minimum of ten (10) weeks of student teaching at 
the elementary school developmental level. The pre-service teacher is expected to develop lessons, work 
as a team member, develop a unit, manage students, assess student performance, and complete any 
tasks expected of a teacher. 
 
 
EDUC 426 
 All-Grade Student Teaching (K-12)                                                     10 hours 
The pre-service teacher is expected to complete a minimum of ten (10) weeks of student teaching at 
the K-12 school developmental level. The pre-service teacher is expected to develop lessons, work as a 
team member, develop a unit, manage students, assess student performance, and complete any tasks 
expected of a teacher.  (HPE and Special Education) 
 
EDUC 428 
 Early Childhood Student Teaching (Preschool to 3rd Grade) 
 
10 hours 
The pre-service teacher is expected to complete a minimum of ten (10) weeks of student teaching at 
the pre-school through 3rd grade level.. The pre-service teacher is expected to develop lessons, work as 
a team member, develop a unit, manage students, assess student performance, and complete any tasks 
expected of a teacher. 
 
EDUC 440 
Senior Field Experience                                                                   1-3 hours  
This course consists of directed observation and participation in selected attendance centers. 
Candidate is expected to be able to develop lessons, deliver them, manage students, assess student 
learning, and complete any tasks expected of a teacher. 
 
EDUC 445 
Studies in Education                                                                         1-3 hours  
Group or individual study of topics of special interest in education. Topics will vary. Candidates can 
repeat course for a total of six (6) credit hours. 
 
EDUC 450 
Education Senior Capstone                                                             3 hours      
The Education Capstone course is for all senior education students who are pursuing a license in the field 
of education. The course will include but not limited to:   personal, professional, analysis, comprehensive 
review of standards related to the profession, preparation for the professional core assessment, research 
in current educational trends, and a culminating senior professional learning portfolio presented to a 
panel of educational experts.  
 
 
 

 
English 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for English courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
ENG 101 
English Composition I  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes development of multi-paragraph themes with emphasis on outlining, developing 
thesis statements, and support as well as the development of reading and critical thinking skills. 
 
ENG 102 
English Composition II  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course includes an introduction to literary analysis through written expression and a study of the 
research process resulting in the writing of literary, informative, and persuasive research papers. 
Prerequisite: ENG 101. 
 
ENG 201 
Introduction to Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Study of fiction, poetry, and drama. The course will examine representative texts from 
each genre with an emphasis on literary conventions and literary analysis. Readings may 
be selections from longer texts. Prerequisite: ENG 101 or permission of the instructor. 
 
ENG 210 
Introduction to British Literature 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of British literature and literary history from the earliest literatures to modern times. The course 
emphasizes the changing literary trends and themes these works represent as well as their historical, 
cultural, and political context. Prerequisite: ENG 101 or permission of the instructor . 
 
ENG 215 
Introduction to American Literature 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of American literature and literary history from the earliest literatures to modern times. The 
course emphasizes the changing literary trends and themes these works represent as well as their 
historical, cultural, and political context. The problem of the American identity is a major theme that will 
be explored throughout the semester. Prerequisite: ENG 101 or permission of the instructor. 
 
ENG 225 
Writing for the Media  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to teach students the fundamentals of newswriting, reporting, and information 
gathering for print and nonprint media. There is an emphasis on interview skills, note taking, and editing 
techniques. Prerequisite: ENG 101. 
 
ENG 301 
Topics in British Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Intensive treatment of an author, period, or genre in British literature. Specific topics covered will change 
each time this course is offered. May be taken for credit three (3) times if different topics are selected. 
Prerequisite: ENG 101. Course may be repeated about a new topic. 
 
ENG 305 
Topics in American Literature  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Intensive treatment of an author, period or genre in American literature. Specific topics will cover change 
each time the course is offered. May be taken for credit three (3) times for if different topics are selected. 
Prerequisite: ENG 101. Course may be repeated about a new topic. 
 
ENG 315 
Introduction to Literary Theory and Criticism  
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces students to significant critical approaches to literature and the application of those 
theories. Literary theory/criticism is a rapidly developing, changing, and varied field. This course will 

 
examine the field from an historical perspective and through close analyses of representative texts. 
Additionally, students will examine texts through the various lenses of divergent theories. Prerequisite: 
ENG 101. 
 
ENG 320 
Presentation of Dramatic Literature 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
Survey of all facets of production; various experiences with dramatic literature and in actual production of 
selected plays. May also count as a literature elective for majors. 
 
ENG 326 
Adolescent and Young Adult Literature 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Criteria for the selection and study of literature written especially for youth in middle and high schools. 
Topics to be discussed include appropriateness of adolescent literature in the secondary curriculum and in 
interdisciplinary studies, censorship, and ways to address it, approaches to reading adolescent literature, 
issues of multiculturalism and diversity, and the use of adolescent literature for extracurricular reading. 
Prerequisite: ENG 101. 
 
ENG 400 
Preparation for English Language Arts Certification 
 
 
0  hours 
A comprehensive review designed to help students prepare for certification in English Language Arts. This 
course must be taken (and passed) in the semester immediately preceding a student-teacher assignment. 
Pass/Fail. Prerequisite: All English Major coursework should be completed prior to, or concurrent 
with, this course. 
 
ENG 405 
Studies in Composition 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A specific topic of composition is covered each time the course is offered. Topics include memoir, short 
story, poetry, the novel, and screenplay. This course may be taken for credit four (4) times. Prerequisite: 
ENG 101. 
 
ENG 444 
Studies in Multicultural Literature 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A specific topic of minority literature is covered each time the course is offered. Topics included are 
African American literature, Native American literature, Latino/Latina literature, and Asian American 
literature. This course may be taken for credit four (4) times. Prerequisite: ENG 101. 
 
ENG 465 
Research Seminar in Shakespeare (Capstone)  
 
 
3 hours 
The seminar will cover several plays by William Shakespeare with an emphasis on thematic analysis as well 
as the literary, cultural, and historical backgrounds of each text. The course will culminate in a research 
paper that successfully incorporates peer-reviewed sources into a cohesive argument. ENG 465 will be 
designed as a capstone experience. Prerequisite: ENG 210 and senior standing. 
 
Geography 
 
GEOG 203 
World Regional Geography 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the physical, political, economic, and cultural conditions of contemporary world regions and 
their relationship to one another. The course will emphasize the diversity of human traditions and 
behavior within world regions, perspectives of different cultures in world regions, and how societies have 
evolved and changed within world regions. 
 
 
 

 
Government 
 
GOV 201 
American Government and Politics 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the structure, organization, and procedures of the government of the United States. 
 
GOV 211 
State and Local Governments  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an examination of intergovernmental relations in the federal system and of the 
organization, function, and politics of state and local governments. This class is intended for sophomores 
and above. 
 
GOV 303 
Introduction to Law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An introduction to Anglo-American law and legal philosophy through an examination of contemporary 
legal issues in American society. Prerequisite: GOV 201 or permission of instructor. 
 
GOV 311 
Moot Court 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
A study of the appellate process covering the following topics: effective advocacy, standards of review, 
limits on appellate briefs and oral arguments. A maximum of three semester hours may be applied to the 
History Major Legal Studies specialization or the Legal Studies minor. Enrollment is limited, with 
preference given to Legal Studies students. The professor will determine who attends and competes at 
Moot Court tournaments. 
 
GOV 312 
International Organizations 
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
A simulation of international organizations through competition in Model United Nations, Model 
Organization of American States, or Model Arab League. A maximum of three semester hours may be 
applied to the global studies minor or global studies specialization. 
 
GOV 393 
English Constitutional Development 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An in-depth study of the political and constitutional development of England from the Anglo-Saxons to 
the present. The course will emphasis how English common law principles shaped constitutional 
monarchy, parliamentary government, and democracy within England. It will also consider how Britain’s 
role as an imperial power transferred these principles of governance globally. Same as HIS 393. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing or permission of instructor. 
 
GOV 433 
American Constitutional Development 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A comprehensive study of the Constitution and interpretations of the Constitutional Law of the United 
States, emphasizing landmark cases on governmental powers and individual rights. Same as HIS 433. 
 
GOV 453 
Western Political Thought 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A comprehensive study of the ideas and ideologies that have shaped the Western World and have 
influenced the non-Western World, emphasizing political theories that contributed to capitalism, 
liberalism, socialism, communism, and fascism. (Same as HIS 453.) 
 
Health and Physical Education 
 
HPE 101 
Basic Skills in Tennis 
1 hour 
HPE 102 
Basic Skills in Fitness Training 
1 hour 
HPE 103 
Basic Skills in Weight Training 
1 hour 
HPE 104 
Basic Skills in Softball 
1 hour 

 
HPE 105 
Basic Skills in Flag Football 
1 hour 
HPE 106 
Basic Skills in Volleyball 
1 hour 
HPE 108 
Basic Skills in Badminton 
1 hour 
HPE 110 
Basic Skills in Soccer 
1 hour 
HPE 111 
Basic Skills in Basketball 
1 hour 
HPE 112 
Basic Skills in Golf 
HPE 
1 hour 
 
HPE 114 
Basic Skills in Pickleball 
1 hour 
HPE 115 
Study Skills in Basic Skills 
 
1 hour 
HPE 116 
Study Skills in Table Tennis 
 
1 hour 
The classes in basic skills provide physical activities for two (2) hours for each one (1) hour credit in which 
the student develops fundamental skills, drills, rules, and methods of the various sports. 
 
HPE 201 
Fitness and Wellness                                                                               2 hours 
This course is designed to provide a foundation for life-long physical fitness and personal wellness. 
Topics include: health, hygiene, and nutrition; basic strategies of exercise, fitness, and wellness; and sport 
for persons of all ages. 
 
HPE 205             Foundations of Physical Education                                                      2 hours 
This course is a general introduction to the field, including the history of physical education from ancient 
times to the present. Leaders and trends in physical education discussed. 
 
HPE 210 
Health Education                                                                                        2 hours 
Presentation and research of essential knowledge, attitudes, and skills of healthful living, including 
substance abuse, chemical dependence, nutrition, mental health, aging, death, communicable and non-
communicable diseases, and sexuality and intimate relationships. 
 
HPE 220 
Rhythmic Activities                                                                                    2 hours 
Fundamental rhythms and patterns are emphasized with a focus on folk and square dancing, aerobic 
dance, and children’s rhythms. Rhythms are demonstrated and practiced. 
 
HPE 225 
Recreational Activities                                                                               2 hours 
This class is designed to provide the history of recreational activities, teaching methods, basic skills, and 
knowledge of recreational activities including the rules of games and sports.  Play from a scientific point 
of view, the educational value of play, and play organization will be studied in depth. The demonstration 
of various skills will be learned in selected activities and sports.  
 
HPE 240  
Principles of Strength and Conditioning  
 
 
 
2 hours 
This course is designed to provide students with the applied scientific knowledge to design and 
implement strength training and conditioning programs in order to improve health and performance. The 
major topics in this course include flexibility, cardiovascular conditioning, aerobic exercise, strength 
training and endurance. This course will include exercise and sport-specific testing, designing and 
implementing safe and effective exercise programs, and injury prevention. The course will also familiarize 
the students with the requirements, knowledge and skills necessary for the NSCA/CSCS certification. 
Prerequisites: HPE 102, HPE 103, HPE 201. 
 
 
 

 
HPE 301 
Adaptive Physical Education                                                                    3 hours 
General introduction to the history and characteristics of various disabilities, types of programs, 
organization and administrative techniques, teaching theories, and evaluation criteria. Various adaptive 
activities are studied, demonstrated, and practiced in a laboratory setting. 
 
HPE 312 
Principles of Motor Learning                                                                    2 hours 
The purpose of this course is to equip and prepare the student as a future educator, administrator, 
athletic director or department chair in the public/private schools, with an overview of the factors that 
affect the acquisition and performance of motor skills including the study of locomotor and non-
locomotor movement, manipulative skills, and developmental and environmental factors that affect 
learning and motor learning behavior changes. Students will also be introduced to motor learning 
theories and concepts, assessment, and development of motor skills in various settings. Special attention 
is given to the relationship between motor skill acquisition / motor skill learning and motor control 
theories.  
 
HPE 315 
Theory of Coaching: Dual, Individual, and Team Sports                        3 hours 
Detailed instruction in the coaching of individual and team sports: tennis, track and field, golf, and team 
sports. Some scouting and game analysis required. 
 
HPE 325 
Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries                                                 2 hours  
Facts and theories for the prevention and care of physical education and athletic injuries. Emergency   first 
aid and long-term treatment discussed. Some laboratory experience in the actual treatment of injuries. 
 
HPE 330 
Officiating                                                                                         
     2 hours  
The study of rules for basketball, baseball, track, football, and volleyball as they apply to officiating. 
 
HPE 335 
Teaching Strategies in Secondary PE  
                     
 
2 hours 
Covers teaching techniques, lesson plans and unit plan development, yearly curriculum, and courses of 
study. Also emphasized are teaching aids, characteristics and identification of physical growth, evaluation, 
and computer literacy for teaching. 
 
HPE 340 
Exercise Physiology                                                                                 3 hours 
An in-depth study of the effects of exercise on the human organism. The effects of exercise on the body 
systems as well as on muscle strength, endurance, speed, and flexibility are presented. The effects of 
external factors on the body during exercise are also studied, such as environmental factors, aging, and 
ergogenic aids. Prerequisites: BIO 301 and BIO 302. 
 
HPE 401 
Kinesiology                                                                                       
  3 hours 
The mechanics of motion as applied to the human body. Development of the ability to scientifically 
analyze activities for the purpose of preventing injury and improving movement. The ability to identify 
and preform different body movements and adaptations is established. Prerequisites: BIO 301 and HPE 
320. 
 
HPE 410 
Teaching Strategies in Elementary PE                                              
 2 hours 
This course includes teaching techniques, yearly calendar/curriculum unit plan, and lesson plans involved 
in teaching elementary school children.  Also emphasized are fundamental motor skills, movement 
education, teaching aids, characteristics and identification of physical growth, safety and first aid 
information, and evaluation.  

 
HPE 415  
Lifetime Sports and Fitness programming 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course explores and examines the theoretical foundations and basic skills, methods, and techniques 
necessary for the effective and efficient design and delivery of recreational sport programs in a variety of 
collegiate, public, quasi-public, and private settings, agencies, and organizations. Throughout this course, 
we explore a variety of recreational sport contexts, including youth sport, adult and community sport, 
campus recreational sport, recreational sport in the market sector, global perspectives, and sport for 
individuals with disabilities.  
 
HPE 420 
Assessment & Evaluation in HPE  
 
 
 
 
2 hours 
Types of tests and their uses, grading, statistics, and assessment are discussed. Construction and 
administration of psychomotor test, including the five components of fitness: cardio-respiratory, muscular 
strength and endurance, flexibility and body composition and sports skills. 
 
HPE 425 
Administration and Organization of Physical Education & Sports       3 hours 
The purpose of this course is to equip and prepare a person as a future educator, administrator, athletic 
director or department chair in the public/private schools, with the abilities and knowledge to provide 
leadership and direction in the areas of management, curriculum, lesson/unit plan, assessment, budgets, 
facilities, and classroom/gymnasium/field management and procedures. 
 
HPE 430 
Teaching Strategies of School Health   
 
  
 
2 hours 
Covers various methods and techniques of teaching health education and the formulation of workable 
heath unit plans, lesson plans, and planning a curriculum.  Attention is given to health problems through 
critical incident techniques.  Techniques include:  establishing goals, objectives, and concepts of planning, 
with emphasis on implementation and evaluation processes.  Examples of implementation include current 
health such as health promotion, diseases, and substance abuse. 
 
HPE 435  
Recreation and Fitness Practicum 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Placement of student in a professional setting in order to gain hands-on experience with an agency that 
delivers recreation, fitness and lifetime sports activities. Provides practical experience in a specialized 
career area fostering the development of skills, competencies, organization and administrative techniques 
needed for entry into the workforce, while working under the direct supervision of selected professionals. 
The YMCA, Boys and Girls clubs, golf and tennis facilities, camps and recreational facilities, hospitals, work 
related fitness centers, nursing and other fitness/recreational related facilities will be utilized in this course. 
 
HPE 440 
Community Health & Safety Education 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Covers various methods and techniques of providing cognitive, affective, and psychomotor learning 
experiences through critical incident techniques.  Techniques include:  establishing goals, objectives, and 
concepts of planning, with emphasis on implementation and evaluation processes.  Examples of 
implementation include the study of areas of addictive substances, preventing diseases, consumerism, 
and understanding the environment.  In addition, essential knowledge, attitudes, ands skills for healthful 
community living and solving of risk behaviors will be covered. 
 
HPE 445 
Studies in PE                                                                                   
     3 hours 
An in-depth study of topics of special interest in Physical Education is explored. Topics will vary. Students 
may repeat course for a total of six (6) credit hours. 
 

 
HPE 450 
Health and Physical Education Senior Capstone Course 
 
3 hours 
The Capstone course is for senior health and physical students. The course will include writing a research 
paper in a current topic in health and physical education. Research design and APA format will be taught.    
 
History 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for history courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
HIS 113 
United States History to 1877  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of the social, economic, cultural, and political forces that shaped U.S. history from the 
Colonial Era through the Civil War and Reconstruction. 
 
HIS 123 
United States History since 1877 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of the social, economic, cultural, and political forces that shaped U.S. history from the end 
of the Reconstruction era to the end of the Cold War, including an emphasis upon the rise of the United 
States as a superpower. 
 
HIS 203 
History of the American Midwest 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of American Midwestern history from its earliest indigenous settlements to the late 
twentieth century, emphasizing major historical periods and developments in the evolution of the 
Midwest’s regional identity, as well as its relationship to the larger narrative of American History. 
Prerequisite: None. 
 
HIS 213 
Western Civilization to 1600 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of western civilization from the early Greeks and Romans through the Middle Ages, the 
Renaissance, and the Reformation, emphasizing the political, economic, and cultural evolution of western 
societies. Prerequisite: None. 
 
HIS 223 
Western Civilization since 1600 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of western civilization from the early seventeenth century through the twentieth century, 
emphasizing the rise of the modern state and the political, economic, and cultural revolutions that 
transformed modern western societies. Prerequisite: None. 
 
HIS 233 
Non-Western Civilizations 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad survey of the political, economic, and cultural evolution of African, Asian, Middle Eastern, and 
Latin American societies from their earliest origins to the present. Prerequisite: None. 
 
HIS 303 
Colonial America, 1492-1763  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A comprehensive study of the formation and early evolution of the three key colonial empires in America: 
the Spanish, the French, and the British. Students will explore the major social, political, and religious 
forces that shaped the identity of the new colonial societies. Prerequisite: HIS 113 or permission of 
instructor. 
 
HIS 313 
The American Revolution and Federalist Era, 1763-1800 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the American Revolution, covering both the War for Independence and the 
larger daunting experiment of creating a new American republic. Prerequisite: HIS 113 or permission of 
instructor. 

 
HIS 323 
Jeffersonian and Jacksonian America, 1800-1848 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the growth and evolution of the United States during the first half of the 
nineteenth century, examining the key industrial, political, and cultural forces of transformation during 
these pivotal years of growth and evolution. Prerequisite: HIS 113 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 333 
Reformation Europe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the causes and consequences of the Protestant Reformation from religious, 
social, cultural, economic, and political perspectives. Prerequisite: HIS 213 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 343 
The French Revolution and Napoleonic Era, 1787-1815 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive examination of Europe from the eighteenth-century Enlightenment to the Congress of 
Vienna, emphasizing the impact of the Enlightenment, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic wars 
upon European politics, diplomacy, and economic and cultural life. Prerequisite: HIS 223 or permission 
of instructor. 
 
HIS 353 
The Age of European Nationalism and Imperialism, 1815-1914 
3 hours  
A comprehensive examination of Europe from the Congress of Vienna to the outbreak of World War I, 
emphasizing the ideological conflict between conservatism, liberalism, democracy and socialism and the 
impact of nationalism, imperialism, and industrialization on European politics, diplomacy, culture, and 
economic life. Prerequisite: HIS 223 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 393 
History of England 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
An in-depth study of the political and constitutional development of England from the Anglo-Saxons to 
the present. The course will emphasis how English common law principles shaped constitutional 
monarchy, parliamentary government, and democracy within England. It will also consider how Britain’s 
role as an imperial power transferred these principles of governance globally. Same as GOV 393. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 400 
Preparation for History Certification  
 
 
 
0 hours  
A comprehensive review designed to help students prepare for certification in history. This course must be 
successfully completed in the semester immediately preceding a student-teacher assignment. Pass/Fail. 
Prerequisite: All history major coursework should be completed prior to, or concurrent with, this 
course. 
 
HIS 403 
The Civil War and Reconstruction, 1848-1877  
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the era of the American Civil War, addressing the major causes of the war, key 
challenges and transformations during the war, and the quest to rebuild and heal during the years of 
formal Reconstruction. Prerequisite: HIS 113 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 410 
History of American Christianity 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A general survey of the history of Christianity in America from its beginnings in the seventeenth century to 
the present.  Critical issues in the more general field of American Religious History will also be explored. 
Same as CH 410. Prerequisite: HIS 123 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 423 
Emergence of Modern America, 1898-1945 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the history of the United States from the pinnacle of the Progressive Era in 
1898 through the conclusion of World War II in 1945, placing a particular emphasis on the roller coaster 
of social, cultural, economic, and political forces that carried Americans from “roaring” prosperity to 

 
deepest depression and finally through a second world war. Prerequisite: HIS 123 or permission of 
instructor. 
 
HIS 433 
American Constitutional Development 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the Constitution and interpretations of the Constitutional Law of the 
United States, emphasizing landmark cases on governmental powers and individual rights. (Same as GOV 
433.) Prerequisite: Junior standing or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 443 
The World at War, 1914-1945  
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the First World War and Second World War, emphasizing the evolution of 
military tactics and strategy in the context of total war and the impact of the wars upon society, culture, 
politics, and economics. Prerequisite: HIS 223 or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 453 
Western Political Thought 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the ideas and ideologies that have shaped the Western World and have 
influenced the non-Western World, emphasizing political theories that contributed to capitalism, 
liberalism, socialism, communism, and fascism. (Same as GOV 453.) Prerequisite: Junior or senior 
standing. 
 
HIS 463 
Studies in History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
An in-depth study of a specific history topic which will examine the political, economic, cultural and social 
aspects of the topic as well as the broader perspective of American and/or World History. Prerequisite: 
Junior standing or permission of instructor. 
 
HIS 473 
History Internship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
his course offers students the opportunity to serve a one-semester public internship at a historical venue 
of their choosing. Prerequisite: HIS 113, HIS 123, and Junior or Senior Standing 
 
HIS 483 
The United States since 1945  
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive study of the history of the United States since 1945, examining the role of the U.S. as a 
leading global superpower, its efforts to combat communism during the Cold War, and the innovative 
social and cultural transformations taking place in its modern society. This course serves as the American 
History Capstone. Prerequisite: HIS 113, HIS 123, and junior or senior standing. 
 
HIS 493 
Europe since 1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
A comprehensive examination of European politics, economics, culture, and society from the end of World 
War I to the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, emphasizing the struggle between democracy and 
totalitarianism. This course serves as the European History Capstone. Prerequisite: HIS 213, HIS 223, and 
junior or senior standing. 
 
Human Resource Management 
 
HRM 301 
Introduction to Human Resource Management 
 
 
3 hours 
The course applies management principles to management of the organization’s human resources. Topics 
studied include recruiting and training employees, role of human resources services, human relations, 
wage and salary administration, evaluation of employees, labor relations, and government regulations.  
 
 

 
HRM  315 
Employee Recruitment, Training, and Development 
 
 
3 hours 
This course acquaints the student with the design and implementation of employee development and 
training programs. Areas of study include: learning theories, needs assessment, legal issues, training 
program design, training methods, professional consultation, employee feedback, and executive 
development. Prerequisites: MGT 201 and HRM 301. 
 
HRM 320 
Labor Relations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course acquaints the student with labor-management relations, including the history and evolution of 
labor unions and contemporary labor-management issues. Topics include: conflict resolution, collective 
bargaining, contract negotiations, arbitration, and mediation. A case study approach is utilized. 
Prerequisites: MGT 201 and HRM 301. 
 
HRM 401 
Employment Law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is an introduction to the diverse body of law that governs the individual employment relationship. 
Topics include: discharge, trade secrets and non-competition clauses, ERISA, vicarious liability, alternative 
dispute resolution, and wage and hour laws such as the FLSA. Additional areas of study include: COBRA, 
OSHA, FMLA, WARN, UI, and worker’s compensation. Prerequisite: HRM 301. 
 
HRM 404 
Compensation and Benefits 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course covers compensation philosophy, strategy, and policy. Areas of study include job evaluation, 
internal and external equity, pay-for-performance plans, financial incentives, wage and salary surveys, and 
employee benefits administration. The legal, regulatory, economic, and strategic issues affecting 
compensation and benefits will be explored. Prerequisite: HRM 301. 
 
HRM 407 
Workplace Safety, Security and Health 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course explores a vital competency of the HR body of knowledge as defined by SHRM and HRCI 
addressing how to respond in an emergency. Nearly every facet of the workplace is affected when these 
incidents unfortunately occur. Areas of study include workplace safety, security, and occupational health. 
An overarching goal of this course is preventative strategies to reinforce safe work environments. In light 
of the increase in violence in all sectors of employment over the past decade, this course will address 
aspects of risk management, introduce laws and legislation of particular concern to safety, security and 
health, and discuss how leaders must guard against such incidents and abuses by implementing necessary 
policies and procedures to be proactively prepared. 
 
HRM 410 
Human Resource Information Systems 
 
 
 
3 hoursThis 
course introduces the student to the role of information systems in human resources. Areas of study 
include data entry, processing and updating of employee information, tracking information, performance 
appraisals, and generating routine letters and reports. Current and future trends and issues in human 
resource management will also be discussed. Prerequisite: HRM 301. 
 
HRM 445 
Studies in Human Resource Management 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This advanced course explores a specific topic or issue in human resource management in-depth. Possible 
areas of study include staffing and evaluation, global human resource management, and employment 
interviewing and testing. The course may be repeated if a different topic of study is chosen. Prerequisite: 
HRM 301. 
 
 
 

 
HRM 450 
SHRM Capstone Review 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed as a capstone course for HR students within the Bachelor of Science in Business 
Administration degree program. In alignment with the Society for Human Resource Management, this 
curriculum covers the entire SHRM Body of Applied Skills and Knowledge (BASK). It is designed to equip 
those in HR with the tools necessary to prepare for HR career success as well as to gain a robust palette of 
professional development resources. In addition, these learning modules offer effective study resources 
for students interested in pursuing certification preparation for the SHRM-CP and SHRM-SCP exams. 
 
HRM 460 
Team Building  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to strengthen the students understanding of team design and how to manage 
interventions that can transform team performance. Principles of building highly effective teams are 
explored by analyzing a variety of group dynamics. Students discover how to identify team issues, and link 
those issues to solutions that will improve performance. Students are introduced to a variety of skills that 
will expedite problem solving within and across teams. 
 
HRM 462 
Servant Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the concept of servant leadership from the perspective of leadership theory and 
applied doctrine integration. Servant leadership is examined from the history, dynamics and expectations 
of a servant leader. Emphasis will be placed on the principles of servant leadership and how influence can 
move people to perform at increasingly higher levels in a dynamic and changing world. 
 
HRM 464 
Leadership Practicum  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to expose students to the leadership experience by applying knowledge learned in 
course work through participation in organizations and/or work situations. Students will explore 
leadership concepts and styles by comparing and contrasting various leaders through job shadowing, 
interviews, videos, and readings. 
Leadership 
 
LDR 438 
Leadership & Management 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide a study of leadership by focusing on what it means to be a good 
leader. Emphasis in the course is on the practice of leadership. The course will examine topics such as the 
nature of leadership, recognizing leadership traits, developing leadership skills, creating a vision, setting 
the tone, listening to out-group members, overcoming obstacles, and addressing values in leadership. 
Attention is given to helping students understand and improve their own leadership capabilities and 
performance. Same as MGT 438. 
 
LDR 445 
Studies in Management 
 
 
 
 
 
1-6 hours 
This course provides the student with an in-depth study of a particular area or topic in management. 
Possible areas of study include administrative office management, industrial management, leadership, and 
small business management. The course may be repeated if a different topic is studied. Prerequisite: 
MGT 201. Same as MGT 445. 
 
LDR 456 
Servant Leadership in the Profession  
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course participants will explore the principles and tenants of effective servant leadership as 
demonstrated in various professional contexts (i.e., Business, Education). Course assignments and research 
will be focused on individual professional interests and work. Professional senior leaders will be 
interviewed through the lens of effective servant leadership principles. Same as MGT 456. 
 

 
LDR 460 
Team Building  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to strengthen the students understanding of team design and how to manage 
interventions that can transform team performance. Principles of building highly effective teams are 
explored by analyzing a variety of group dynamics. Students discover how to identify team issues and link 
those issues to solutions that will improve performance. Students are introduced to a variety of skills that 
will expedite problem solving within and across teams. Same as MGT 460. 
 
LDR 462 
Servant Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the concept of servant leadership from the perspective of leadership theory and 
applied doctrine integration. Servant leadership is examined from the history, dynamics and expectations 
of a servant leader. Emphasis will be placed on the principles of servant leadership and how influence can 
move people to perform at increasingly higher levels in a dynamic and changing world. Same as MGT 462. 
 
LDR 463 
Community Servant Leadership 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course participants will explore multiple community agencies. An emphasis in this course would be 
research and the thorough analysis of community agency’s mission, organizational leadership, and 
collective impact. Community service hours will be required in this course. (Prerequisite to MGT/LDR 464 
Leadership Practicum) 
 
LDR 464 
Leadership Practicum  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to expose students to the leadership experience by applying knowledge learned in 
course work through participation in organizations and/or work situations. Students will explore 
leadership concepts and styles by comparing and contrasting various leaders through job shadowing, 
interviews, videos, and readings. Same as MGT 464. 
 
Management 
 
MGT 201 
Principles of Management 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is an introductory course in management designed to acquaint the student with the study and 
research in the field of management. The course familiarizes the student with the primary functions of 
management and their importance as components of the total management process. Topics of study 
include Theory X and Theory Y managers, strategy and planning, organizational design, leadership styles, 
and managing diversity in an organization. 
 
MGT 202 
Work/Life Management 
 
 
 
 
 
2 hours 
This course will examine planning, preparing and evaluating a sustainable healthy lifestyle that addresses 
the physical, mental, social and spiritual aspects of life alongside demands inherent to the workplace. 
Time and stress management techniques will be explored along with integrating regular physical exercise 
into one’s daily routine to maintain overall health and wellness. Class delivery will include technology 
applications through gamification to enhance learning. 
 
MGT 310 
Operations and Facility Management  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course applies management principles to the overall management of a large facility and its entire 
operations. Areas of study include operations and production management, systems design and analysis, 
manufacturing processes, facility construction, security, and control techniques. Principles and 
requirements related to programming and managing various types of public and private facilities are also 
included. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 

 
MGT 325 
Safety Management   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will examine the major safety management issues that impact the workplace including safety 
awareness, loss control, regulatory issues, legal implications, OSHA standards, and the essential 
components of a safety training program. 
 
MGT 415 
International Business  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a study of international and cross-cultural elements of business decisions, enterprises, 
markets, and institutions. The student examines globalization of the business entity’s competitiveness. 
Managerial, operational, and marketing problems of the world enterprise are discussed, with particular 
attention to the influence of ethnic and cultural differences on communication and decision making. 
Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 425 
Entrepreneurship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a study of entrepreneurship, its opportunities, and its problems relative to new- venture 
analysis, personnel, control, finance, marketing, and management in service, distributive, and 
manufacturing firms. The student will explore the challenges the entrepreneur faces, including market 
assessment and finding funds. As part of the course, the student designs a business plan. Prerequisites: 
MGT 201. 
 
MGT 430 
Organizational Behavior 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on the behavior of the organization as a function of individual and interpersonal 
behavior and group processes within an organization. Areas of study include learning organizations, 
organizational culture, organizational structure and design, employee attitudes and values, employee 
motivational theories, ethical decision making, the promotion of employee creativity, stress management, 
interpersonal communication, and work teams. To enhance the student’s own interpersonal 
communication skills, he or she will participate in numerous group projects and activities with fellow 
classmates throughout the course.  
 
MGT 435 
Strategic Management and Marketing  
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the formulation and implementation of strategies. This is a capstone course involving 
coordination and integration of knowledge and techniques acquired in previous courses. Particular 
attention is given to determining company strategy in defining major policies in marketing, research and 
development, production, procurement, human resources, finance and profit, and mergers and 
acquisitions in central management operations in compliance with governmental rules and regulations 
and the social and ethical environment. The case study method is used. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 438 
Leadership & Management 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide a study of leadership by focusing on what it means to be a good 
leader. Emphasis in the course is on the practice of leadership. The course will examine topics such as the 
nature of leadership, recognizing leadership traits, developing leadership skills, creating a vision, setting 
the tone, listening to out-group members, overcoming obstacles, and addressing values in leadership. 
Attention is given to helping students understand and improve their own leadership capabilities and 
performance. 
 
MGT 440 
Professional Internship 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The student will experience a working internship in a business or industry setting related to their 
individual program of study, and future career goals. Experiences are to be designed to expand student 

 
knowledge, and/or focus on an in-depth practical exposure to certain sectors of the U.S. enterprise 
system. 
 
MGT 445 
Studies in Management 
 
 
 
 
 
1-6 hours 
This course provides the student with an in-depth study of a particular area or topic in management. 
Possible areas of study include administrative office management, industrial management, leadership, and 
small business management. The course may be repeated if a different topic is studied. Prerequisite: 
MGT 201. 
 
MGT 450 
Supply Chain Management 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Supply chain management encompasses the planning and management of all activities involved in 
sourcing and procurement, conversion, and all logistics management activities. Importantly, it also 
includes coordination and collaboration with channel partners, which can be suppliers, intermediaries, 
third party service providers, and customers. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 452 
Quality Systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A quality management system (QMS) is the organizational structure, procedures, processes and resources 
needed to implement isA study of team cooperation and dynamics via a continuous improvement cycle, 
and customer satisfaction and perceived quality is included. The ISO 9000 family of standards are 
reviewed. Aspects of quality and sustainability that result from systematic thinking, transparency, 
documentation, and diagnostic discipline are included. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 453 
Six Sigma Principles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course covers organizational goals, lean concepts and tools, quality function design, quality systems 
deployment, failure mode analysis, and creating successful quality teams in the organization. 
Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 454 
Quality Project Management  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Applications of quality control principles in the workplace is the course focus. Content includes elements 
of process control, internal and external stakeholders, utilizing customer feedback, as well as collecting 
and analyzing production data. Utilize data and other inputs to develop and implement quality control 
plans in a team environment. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 455 
Logistics and Product Distribution 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Logistics management activities typically include inbound and outbound transportation management, 
fleet management, warehousing, materials handling, order fulfillment, logistics network design, inventory 
management, supply/demand planning, and management of third party logistics services providers. 
Logistics management is an integrating function, which coordinates and optimizes all logistics activities, as 
well as integrates logistics activities with other functions including marketing, sales manufacturing, 
finance, and information technology. Prerequisite: MGT 201. 
 
MGT 456 
Servant Leadership in the Profession  
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course participants will explore the principles and tenants of effective servant leadership as 
demonstrated in various professional contexts (i.e., Business, Education). Course assignments and research 
will be focused on individual professional interests and work. Professional senior leaders will be 
interviewed through the lens of effective servant leadership principles. Same as LDR 456. 
 
 
 

 
MGT 460 
Team Building  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to strengthen the students understanding of team design and how to manage 
interventions that can transform team performance. Principles of building highly effective teams are 
explored by analyzing a variety of group dynamics. Students discover how to identify team issues and link 
those issues to solutions that will improve performance. Students are introduced to a variety of skills that 
will expedite problem solving within and across teams. 
 
MGT 462 
Servant Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the concept of servant leadership from the perspective of leadership theory and 
applied doctrine integration. Servant leadership is examined from the history, dynamics and expectations 
of a servant leader. Emphasis will be placed on the principles of servant leadership and how influence can 
move people to perform at increasingly higher levels in a dynamic and changing world. 
 
MGT 463 
Community Servant Leadership 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course participants will explore multiple community agencies. An emphasis in this course would be 
research and the thorough analysis of community agency’s mission, organizational leadership, and 
collective impact. Community service hours will be required in this course. (Prerequisite to MGT/LDR 464 
Leadership Practicum) 
 
MGT 464 
Leadership Practicum  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to expose students to the leadership experience by applying knowledge learned in 
course work through participation in organizations and/or work situations. Students will explore 
leadership concepts and styles by comparing and contrasting various leaders through job shadowing, 
interviews, videos, and readings. 
 
MGT 465 
Research Methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students will locate sources for Capstone project. Learn Quantitative and Qualitative research methods. 
 
Marketing 
 
MKT 201 
Principles of Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the student to such concepts as marketing management, analysis of marketing 
opportunities, marketing planning and strategy, the marketing mix, and execution of the marketing 
program. The student will design a marketing plan as part of the course. 
 
MKT 305 
Marketing Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to the field of marketing research for effective decision making. The 
student will learn techniques involved in collection, tabulation, and analysis of marketing information. 
Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
MKT 310 
Consumer Behavior 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course illustrates the practical importance of understanding consumers’ knowledge and attitudes, 
incorporating various approaches for assessing such knowledge and attitudes. The course identifies major 
factors that influence how consumers process and learn marketing information and explores techniques 
marketers can use to influence consumer attitudes and behavior. Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
 
 

 
MKT 315 
Sales and Personal Selling 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course addresses the principles and practices in planning, organizing, and controlling sales forces. 
The student acquires the skills needed for a successful career in sales and marketing. Areas of study 
include selection, training, compensating, supervising, stimulating salespeople, and the analysis of sales 
potential and costs. Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
MKT 330 
Sports Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of sports marketing as a component of an integrated marketing 
communications strategy. Students study the history and contemporary application of sports marketing in 
business. The curriculum addresses corporate as well as sporting property use of sports marketing 
strategies to achieve business objectives.  The course examines strategies that address critical business 
constituencies, consumers, trade factors, employees, and the financial community.  Also covered are 
sports marketing within the context of special sporting event sponsorships, professional sports teams as 
well as governing organizations, sports media (broadcast, print, social media, and Internet, licensing, and 
hospitality.  
 
MKT 340 
Social Media and E-Marketing  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course focuses on the creative development and utilization of current media technology and software 
in marketing strategies. Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
MKT 425 
International Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course outlines the adjustments in marketing strategy needed to remain competitive in a global 
environment. The impact of changing economic, political, legal, social and cultural environments on 
management decision-making is examined. Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
MKT 445 
Studies in Marketing  
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This course provides the student with an in-depth study of a particular area or topic in marketing. Possible 
areas of study include: marketing strategy, industrial marketing, and international marketing. The course 
may be taken more than once if a different topic is studied. Prerequisite: MKT 201. 
 
Mathematics 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for mathematics courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
MATH 105  
Intermediate Algebra   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A course in elementary algebra required for students whose placement test scores indicate a need for 
additional work before taking required college mathematics courses. Topics in real number system, linear 
equations, polynomials, rational expressions, and radical expression. Does not satisfy the mathematics 
required for degree programs.  
 
MATH 110  
Mathematics and Its Applications  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A course designed to introduce students to thinking processes developed in mathematics. Explores a 
variety of topics including set theory, geometry, probability and statistics, algebra, and contemporary 
applications such as consumer mathematics. Prerequisite: MATH 105or MATH 110 or sufficient 
Placement Score. 
 
 
 

 
MATH 115 
 College Algebra  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
College level algebra with an emphasis on life applications problems. Topics include models, 
polynomials, functions and graphs, systems, matrices, and sequences. Prerequisite: MATH 105 or 
sufficient Placement Score. 
 
MATH 120  
Trigonometry   
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the six trigonometric ratios and their inverses, the unit circle and radian measure, trigonometric 
identities, equations and graphs involving the trigonometric functions, polar representation and conics, 
and applications of the trigonometric functions. Prerequisite: MATH 115 or sufficient Placement Score. 
 
MATH 125  
Probability and Statistics I 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Basic course covering topics of: collection, organization and summarization of data; basic probability; 
probability distributions; sampling distributions; confidence intervals; and tests of hypothesis. 
Prerequisite: MATH 115 or higher. 
 
MATH 210  
Math for Elementary Teachers   
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A general mathematics course designed specifically for Elementary Education majors for the Praxis I and 
for teaching experiences. Topics include: problem solving and critical thinking, set theory, logic, number 
representations, the real numbers, and algebra. Prerequisite: MATH 110 or higher. 
 
MATH 212  
Linear Algebra   
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A higher algebra course covering linear abstract algebra including such topics as matrices, vectors, and 
linear programming. Prerequisite: MATH 115 or higher. 
 
MATH 216  
Calculus I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
First in three-course sequence to introduce the theory of differential and integral calculus and their 
applications utilizing algebraic, including trigonometric, functions. Associated topics from analytic 
geometry are included. Prerequisite: MATH 120 or equivalent. 
 
MATH 225  
Probability and Statistics II  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Combinatorics; Bayes’ theorem; negative binomial, geometric, hypergeometric, Poisson, uniform, 
exponential, and gamma distributions; probability-generating functions; moments and moment-
generating functions; sums of independent random variables. Prerequisites: MATH 125 and MATH 216. 
 
MATH 251  
Discrete Mathematics   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
College level non-calculus mathematics with an emphasis on topics useful in computer science, physical 
and life science, as well as business. Topics include set theory, counting techniques, binary numbers, trees, 
graphs, and networks. Prerequisite: MATH 115 or equivalent. 
 
MATH 317  
Calculus II  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Continuation of MATH 216. Differential and integral calculus of transcendental functions; 
techniques of integration; indeterminate forms and improper integrals, and series and sequences. 
Prerequisite: MATH 216. 
 
MATH 318  
Calculus III  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Continuation of MATH 317. Conics and polar coordinates, numerical methods, geometry in a plane 
and space, partial derivatives, and differential equations. Prerequisite: MATH 317. 
 

 
MATH 335  
Modern Geometry  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the axiomatic method, the elements of plane geometry, the parallel postulate, 
constructions, an introduction to non-Euclidean geometry, finite geometries, and geometric 
transformations. Prerequisite: MATH 251 or equivalent. 
 
MATH 400  
Preparation for Mathematics Certification 
 
 
 
0 hours 
This course is designed to help students prepare for certification in Mathematics. This course must be 
successfully completed in the semester immediately preceding a student-teacher assignment. Pass/Fail. 
Prerequisite: All Mathematics coursework should be completed prior to, or concurrent with, this course. 
 
MATH 401  
Differential Equations   
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Introduction to methods of solving differential equations. Several techniques of solving first order 
differential equations. Differential operators are applied to both homogeneous and nonhomogeneous 
differential equations. Techniques of nonlinear equations are used with general, particular, and singular 
solutions. Prerequisite: MATH 317. 
 
MATH 403  
Complex Variables  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of functions of complex variables including: properties of complex numbers, analytic functions 
and their power series expansions, singularities, and internal theorems. Prerequisites: MATH 251 and 
MATH 317. 
 
MATH 405  
Numerical Analysis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Concentrates on computer methods for numerical problem solution using Maple. Topics include number 
representation and error, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration, solving nonlinear 
equations, linear systems, splines, and differential equations. Laboratory programming exercises. 
Prerequisites: MATH 317 and 325. 
 
MATH 415  
Number Theory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A study of the positive integers, their properties, and relationships between them. This study will include 
topics associated with divisibility, congruences, primes and the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, 
number theoretic functions, Diophantine equations, Pythagorean triples, primitive roots and indices, and 
quadratic reciprocity. Prerequisite: MATH 251. 
 
MATH 425  
Applied Probability and Statistics  
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed for students who are pursuing a Bsc. Degree in mathematics with concentrations 
in Actuarial Science. The course aims to provide an explanation to probability theory, mathematical 
statistics and applied statistics. This course will help the students to be able to understand the theoretical 
concepts of probability and applied statistics, and to master the probabilistic and applied statistical 
techniques. Prerequisite: MATH 225. 
 
MATH 445 
 Topics in Mathematics  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Designed to provide mathematical topics of interest to students. Prerequisite: Permission of 
instructor. 
 
 
 

 
Music 
 
MUS 150 
Music Appreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 hours 
This course is designed to develop an understanding of music from all parts of the world. Topics covered 
include Western music history, Gregorian chant, art music such as symphonies and operas, as well as the 
non-Western music themes of African tribal music, and South American, Polynesian, and Asian music.  
 
MUS 178  
Music Ensembles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
This course is designed to be the catch all course for any student who wishes to receive course credit for 
their contribution to an instrumental music ensemble.  Depending on the number of ensembles in which 
the student participated, the student may receive 1, 2, or 3 credit hours for their work. Participation in the 
ensemble is allowed for as many semesters as the student wishes; however, course credit is only available 
up to 12 credit hours 
 
MUS 225 
History of American Popular Music 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of the most significant styles of American popular music in chronological order, beginning with 
the roots and continuing through the present day. The course is designed to help the student think 
creatively and critically about popular music. Several recurring themes will be explored throughout the 
course: the interaction of European American, African American, and Latin American traditions, the 
influence of mass media and technology, the role of popular music as a symbol of identity. 
 
MUS 326 
 Church Music for Youth & Children 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of choral church music specifically for youth and children. Includes the use of choir materials, 
drama, and art activities appropriate for youth and children. 
 
Music Technology 
 
MUT 200 
Media Production 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Survey of media production currently in use today, as well as historical roots of media. Topics include 
media bias, newspaper writing, blogs, and extensive research in social media, sound production, and 
applying sound to video. 
 
MUT 210 
Sound Reinforcement & Critical Listening 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Explores current technologies and techniques involved in modern sound mixing and reinforcement. 
Topics include club venue and large concert systems, ear-training and aesthetics for sound engineers. 
Class activities involve listening and analysis of a wide variety of music genres as well as specialized ear-
training materials and the development of a vocabulary for communication of aural impressions. Field 
work required. 
 
MUT 220 
Recording Technology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Project-based course emphasizing creative and aesthetic aspects of multitrack music recording. Emphasis 
on MIDI sequencing and virtual instruments within GarageBand, Cubasis, and other music production 
software, and drum machines, synthesizers, samplers, and other electronic instruments used to create a 
commercial music track. Topics also include microphones techniques, rough mixing, and signal 
processing. 
 

 
Office Administration 
 
OA 101  
Keyboarding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 hours 
This course offers basic instruction on touch-typing on the alpha-numeric keyboard, using microcomputer 
and word processing software. An introduction to typing a letter, a simple table, and a simple report and 
to the numeric keypad is included. Students needing to operate a computer terminal keyboard will receive 
basic skills that will allow them to input information into a computer efficiently. The course is required for 
all Business majors unless they demonstrate a typing proficiency of at least 30 words per minute on the 
initial placement test. 
 
OA 102  
Basic Keyboarding Applications 
 
 
 
 
2 hours 
This course emphasizes the development of keyboarding speed and accuracy, using a microcomputer and 
word processing software. Skill is applied to composition at the keyboard, straight-copy materials and a 
variety of documents, some with special features, at increased rates of productivity. Prerequisite: OA 101 
or documented keyboarding skills of at least 30 words per minute. 
 
OA 151  
Word Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course emphasizes advanced keyboarding applications and mastery of word processing software 
commands. Topics include formatting complex documents, correcting edited documents, machine 
transcription, proofreading skills, production keyboarding, office simulations, and creating and managing 
subdirectories.  
 
OA 152  
Spreadsheets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course offers a general introduction to basic data manipulation skills and techniques used with 
spreadsheets, such as editing, computing, and charting. 
 
OA 153  
Database Management 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge, skills, and experience required to use 
Microsoft Office Access in an effective manner in the business environment. The course will cover the 
fundamentals of database architecture, database management systems, and database systems. Principles, 
theories, and methods of database design and techniques for the effective development of a functional 
database will be emphasized. 
 
OA 252  
Document Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course emphasizes processing original, edited, and digital documents. The course includes 
assembling documents from multiple source documents; processing a series of documents in polished 
form in a production environment; and application of grammar, punctuation, vocabulary building, 
formatting, spelling, and proofreading to the document preparation process.  
 
OA 295  
Desktop Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is devoted to acquiring the knowledge and skills necessary to develop newsletters, annual 
reports, brochures, and promotional materials by using office-standard personal computers and 
appropriate software. This course will be a practical hands-on introduction to the hardware and software 
used to perform electronic page layout. A variety of advertising, business, and informational reports and 
similar documents will be created, modified, and manipulated with page layout and drawing programs. 
Development of knowledge will include the basic principles of design and layout. 
 
 
 

 
OA 299  
Studies in Business Administration 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This course is designed to study new and changing patterns of technology use within the workplace. 
 
OA 445  
Studies in Business Administration 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
This course is designed to provide an in-depth study of office administration topics. Possible areas of 
study include integrated office procedures, desktop publishing, and records management. The course 
may be taken for credit more than once when the area of study is different. 
 
Philosophy 
 
PHIL 105 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the student to principles of sound reasoning, focusing on informal techniques 
utilized in writing sound arguments and formal techniques utilized in logic. (Christian Studies Core) 
 
PHIL 110 
Introduction to Philosophy 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will introduce students to those philosophers who stand out in the tradition and their most 
influential ideas. These philosophers will encountered through a study of philosophical topics rather than 
an historical timeline. The course will discuss such questions as the nature of reality, the nature of 
knowledge, the existence of God, free-will, and art. 
 
PHIL 210 
Faith and Reason 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This is an introduction to the philosophy of religion, and it addresses such perennial issues as the nature 
of religious experience, religious language, proofs for the existence of God, and the problem of evil. The 
connection between each issue is whether or not religious claims and arguments are to be understood as 
an exercise of our faith, our reason, or some combination of both. 
 
PHIL 220 
Introduction to Ethics  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Ethics is defined as the principles that govern morals. This course will introduce the student to those 
ethical principles that have been formulated by philosophers of the Western tradition. (Christian Studies 
Core) 
 
PHIL 301 
Christian Ethics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an introduction to the field of Christian ethics, addressing various approaches in biblical and 
theological ethics. Attention will be given to the history of Christian ethics. Application of approaches to a 
variety of social issues will be considered. Prerequisite: PHIL 220. (Christian Studies Core) 
 
PHIL 310 
History of Philosophy I – Ancient to Medieval  
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a study of selected philosophers’ primary works from the Ancient and Medieval periods. 
Material will be presented according to the historical timeline, focusing on the interaction of ideas from 
one philosopher to the next. 
 
PHIL 320 
History of Philosophy II – Modern Philosophy  
 
 
3 hours 
This course is a study of selected philosophers’ primary works from the Modern period material will be 
presented according to the historical timeline, focusing on the interaction of ideas from one philosopher 
to the next. 
 
 
 

 
PHIL 401 
Concentrated Special Topic Study 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will be guided by a single topic chosen by the instructor for the length of the semester. 
Potential topics could be post-structuralism, onto-theology, philosophy’s influence on Christianity. 
 
PHIL 402 
Concentrated Study of a Philosopher  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will be a concentrated study of a philosopher who has left an indelible mark on the tradition. 
This course not only will show the development of a philosopher’s thought, but it will also teach the 
methodological model for intently studying all other philosophers. 
 
PHIL 420 
Christianity and Postmodernism 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will look at the way Christian thinkers are dealing with those questions put forth by 
philosophers who are typically considered to be postmodern. Topics for this course will include the 
following: 1) Is anything absolute? 2) Is one person’s or group’s “truth” as good as another’s? 3) Does 
postmodernism exist? 4) Can one be both Christian and postmodern? 
 
PHIL 450 
Contemporary Continental Philosophy 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course reviews the main ideas of 20th century continental philosophy with a special focus on its 
impact on theology. 
 
Physical Science 
 
PHSC 101 
Introduction to Physical Science 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Introduces the student to the topics of physics, chemistry, astronomy, weather, and geology. A student 
taking this course is expected to have competency in algebra. Prerequisite: MATH 110 or higher. 
 
PHSC 110 
Studies in Physical Science 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Topics are offered primarily for those who are interested in basic topics in the physical sciences. The 
subject matter may change with each offering of the course. 
 
Physics 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for physics courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
PHY 201 
General Physics I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Topics include mechanics, laws of motion, kinetic, potential and rotational energy, momentum and 
angular momentum, solids and fluids, vibrations, waves and sound. Prerequisite: MATH 120. 
 
PHY 202 
General Physics II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 hours 
Topics include thermal physics and laws of thermo dynamics, electric forces and fields, current 
andresistance, AC and DC current, capacitance, magnetism, reflection and refraction of light, mirror, lenses 
and wave optics. Prerequisite: PHY 201 and MATH 216 (or concurrent enrollment in MATH 216). 
 
 
Practical Studies 
 
PS 100  
Introduction to Ministry and the Church 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Orientation to Christian ministry and various aspects of the roles played by the Christian minister and the 
issues common to Christian ministry. Emphasis is placed on issues of leadership, the call to ministry, the 
minister’s personal life, and the spirituality of the minister. This class is intended as an entry-level class for 

 
Christian Studies majors and should be taken in the fall semester of the freshman year. (Christian Studies 
Core.) 
 
PS 300  
Pastoral Counseling 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course deals with various methods of counseling that may be helpful to the pastor of the local 
church. Discussion will relate to the varying counseling theories used in practicing psychotherapy by the 
secular world. Efforts will be made to introduce the student to recognized and accepted techniques of 
counseling that apply to the church world. Case studies, role play activities, and video-taped review of the 
student actually working in a counseling situation will be employed to give students an opportunity to 
understand and enhance these counseling skills. 
 
PS 310  
Introduction to Preaching 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Detailed study of the construction and delivery of sermons, including the functional elements and the 
various objectives in sermonizing. Sermon content, structure, and style are examined. (Christian Studies 
Core.) 
 
PS 311  
Preaching Practicum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Students preach with evaluation by instructor and class. Prerequisite: PS 310. 
 
PS 445  
Practicum in Ministry  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The primary goal of this practicum is to give the student an opportunity to work in various areas of 
ministry. The student enrolled in this practicum will be required to select a specific area of ministry 
(chosen by the student and approved by the class instructor). This involvement will allow the student to 
serve and develop ministry in an environment that offers both support and strict supervision by a 
qualified mentor in the chosen area of ministry. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
Psychology 
 
A grade of C- or higher must be achieved in all prerequisites required for psychology courses or 
permission of the instructor. 
 
PSY 101 
General Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A broad introduction to the many approaches to the study of human behavior and the effects of drugs, 
health, culture, etc. This includes new trends in research and professional fields and an awareness of the 
embryonic nature of psychology studies. 
 
PSY 201 
Introduction to Counseling 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of the counseling profession. Focus is placed upon various approaches 
to counseling, including Cognitive, Behavioral, and Solution-focused counseling. Time will be spent 
discussing types of counseling, such as marital, addictions, and career counseling. Prerequisite: PSY 101. 
 
PSY 212 
Sports Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course explores the role of psychology as it is related to the enhancement of athletic performance. 
Various mental training skills that can enhance one’s athletic performance will be covered. Some of the 
areas related to this course that will be explored include motivation, self-confidence, goal setting, 
burnout, stress and anxiety, leadership, imagery, healthy attitudes towards sports participation and other 
sports-related activity. Personality as it relates to competition will also be investigated. Prerequisite: PSY 
101. 

 
PSY 220 
Social Welfare Policies  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces students to social welfare policies and issues in the United States. The economic, 
religious, political, and other socio-cultural influences of social welfare policies and services, as they relate 
to individual and institutions, are explored. (Same as SOC 220.) Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of 
instructor. 
 
PSY 251 
Industrial/Organizational Psychology  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will conduct an in-depth study of the scientific psychological principles, procedures, and 
methods applied to human behavior in organizations. Throughout the course, students will learn to apply 
the methods and principles of I-O Psychology to improve job satisfaction, maximize employ efficiency and 
motivation, and develop management style of supervising employee performance.  Prerequisite: PSY 
101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 260 
Life Span Human Behavior & Development 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of human development over the total life span from conception to death is considered. Emphasis 
is placed on psycho-social development, biological and socio-cultural contexts, and methods for studying 
human development. Theories that address developmental changes in cognition, behavior, personality, 
social roles, and interpersonal relationships are explored. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of 
instructor. 
 
PSY 290 
Social & Cultural Diversity 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines various cultures and diverse societies, with an emphasis on differences in race, age, 
social class, religion, and family. Students will gain insight into how social and cultural differences impact 
an individual’s ability to acclimate into new environments as well as empathize with individuals coming 
into their environment from another culture. (Same as SOC 290.) Prerequisite: PSY 101 or SOC 201 or 
consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 291 
Statistics for Social Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Basic course covering topics of collection, organization, and summarization of data; basic probability; 
probability distributions; sampling distributions; confidence intervals; and tests of hypothesis. 
Prerequisite: MATH 110 or higher and PSY 101 or permission of instructor. (Same as CJ 291 and SOC 
291.) 
 
PSY 300 
Addictions Theory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
This course will introduce students to the theoretical approaches to addictions counseling. In addition to 
substance abuse, students will learn about food, gambling, and sexual addiction. Biological, psychological, 
social, and spiritual influences will be discussed. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 301 
Child Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The course surveys the major forms of children’s learning and cognitive processes, examining both the 
empirical data base and the theoretical formulations used to account for the findings. Topics covered 
include: conditioning in infancy and early childhood, language acquisition, behavior modification, 
discrimination reversal learning, verbal learning, concept learning, and learning to read. Prerequisite: PSY 
101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 302 
Adolescent Psychology 
 
 
 
 

3 hours 
This course explores the psychological effect of physical maturity on the interests and intellectual 
development of the adolescent, considered in depth, including study of the recreational activities, 

 
educational needs, and the social and emotional problems of the age group. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or 
consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 312 
Sensation and Perception 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the processes by which organisms form concepts of the environment through the 
senses. It includes a study of the physical stimuli, the nature of the sensory organs and related networks, 
and the effects of learning on perception in humans. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 322 
Family Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will examine the impact that addiction has upon the family. Family systems will be discussed; 
family rules, roles, and behavior patterns will be explored. Self-help groups and other resources will be 
researched in order to prepare future addictions counselors for work with addicted individuals and their 
families. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 330 
Substance Abuse and Dependency 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course addresses the use and abuse of all mood altering chemicals. This includes the historical 
aspects of chemical use and the various dimensions of contemporary use. The physical, individual, and 
social, as well as the intellectual, emotional, and spiritual dimensions form the framework for 
understanding the dependency process. Differential patterns of use and abuse among families, cultures, 
races, genders, ages, professions, and areas of the country are among the special issues addressed. Legal 
issues are also covered, as well as current research in the field. The role of the social worker and 
psychologist in assessment and intervention is examined. (Same as SOC 330). Prerequisite: PSY 101 or 
consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 340 
Addictions Counseling  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course will introduce students to the field of addictions counseling, with an emphasis on intervention, 
treatment, education, and prevention of addictive behavior. Current research will be explored in order to 
educate students about addictive behavior and how to best help individuals struggling with addiction. 
Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 351 
Psychological Tests and Measures 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the nature and functions of psychological testing, and the interpretation of test 
scores by using related clinical and research hypotheses is examined. Intelligence, aptitude, and 
personality tests are covered, with particular emphasis on clinical interpretation. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or 
consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 352 
Physiological Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course explores an introductory level of the structure and function of the nervous system and 
explores the biological bases of perception, consciousness, hunger, sexuality, sleep, memory, and reward. 
Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 372 
Abnormal Psychology  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the major theoretical approaches to the understanding of behavior as they are 
explored and applied to a systematic discussion of the major forms of psychopathology as categorized by 
the DSM-5. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
 
 

 
PSY 380 
Treatment Planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of empirically based treatments of 
psychological disorders with a special emphasis on addiction. The course will emphasize the importance 
of how to construct a treatment plan, explore the different types of treatment plans, the importance of a 
treatment plans for psychotherapy, and emphasize why treatment plans are an essential part of the 
standard of care for clients. Students will also acquire a basic understanding of the application of a multi-
axial system of diagnosis. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 390 
Psychoactive Drugs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is intended to provide students with a deeper understanding of the physiological, 
psychological, and social effects of drug use and abuse. Students will become familiar with the various 
classes of psychoactive drugs, and will receive an overview of treatment options, including strengths and 
weaknesses of using psychoactive drugs. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 401 
Social Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to social psychological theory, research, and application. Topics 
covered include: attitude formation and change, social influence processes, social cognition, moral 
development, interpersonal attraction, aggression, prejudice, and political psychology. Basic social issues, 
concepts, theories, and research findings from the field of psychology are applied to understand major 
social problems confronting the contemporary world, such as genocide, poverty, and international 
conflict. (Same as SOC 401.) Prerequisite: PSY 101 and junior standing. 
 
PSY 405 
Personality and Individual Differences  
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines the various approaches to personality as defined by Freud, Adler, Jung, Horney, 
Sullivan, Allport, Rogers, Maslow and Kelly. Class is only for juniors and seniors. Prerequisite: PSY 101 
and junior standing or consent of instructor. 
 
PSY 410 
Internship in Psychology 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Through work in an appropriate supervised placement setting, students are provided an opportunity to 
become acquainted with the application of theories, principles, and empirical findings in the area of 
clinical psychology. Class is only for juniors and seniors. Prerequisite: Eighteen hours of Psychology. 
 
PSY 412 
Criminal Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours  
This course will explore the role of psychology as it relates to criminal behavior. Various topics of criminal 
psychology will be explored that include forensic psychology, exploring criminal behavior and criminal 
profiling, understanding maladaptive behavior, and criminal law. Prerequisite: PSY 101 or consent of 
instructor. 
 
PSY 420 
Addictions Counseling Internship I 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Through work in an approved addictions based, supervised placement setting, students are provided an 
opportunity to become acquainted with the application of theories, principles, and empirical findings in 
the area of addictions counseling. Students will be required to participate in 175 hours of supervised field 
experience. Prerequisite: PSY 340. 
 
PSY 430 
Addictions Counseling Internship II 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Through continued work in an approved addictions based, supervised placement setting, students are 
provided an opportunity to become acquainted with the application of theories, principles, and empirical 

 
findings in the area of addictions counseling. Students will be required to participate in 175 hours of 
supervised field experience. Prerequisite: PSY 420. 
 
PSY 440 
Ethics & Professional Development 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to ethical dilemmas faced by psychology professionals. Students will 
be challenged to think critically about situations that may not have obvious solutions. Additionally, 
students will examine career options, job outlook, and will gain tools that will assist them with becoming a 
successful professional. Prerequisite: PSY 101 and Junior Standing. 
 
PSY 445 
Studies in Psychology  
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
An in-depth consideration of a specialized topic from current research literature in psychology. Topics 
vary each semester. Class is only for juniors and seniors. Prerequisite: PSY 101 and junior standing, 
 
PSY 495 
Psychology Capstone  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The capstone course focuses on applying major psychological theories that have contributed to an 
understanding of learning, development, social, personality, and abnormal psychology. Emphasis is placed 
on students understanding and ability to critique and evaluate psychological research in those areas. The 
capstone course provides senior-level students with the opportunity to demonstrate that they can 
successfully demonstrate critical thinking and communication skills, both written and oral with an 
emphasis on creating and presenting a research concept that they have designed. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of the Psychology Core and Senior Standing. 
 
Religious Studies 
 
RS 101  
General Baptist Life 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course has as its primary focus the instruction of General Baptist students in the faith, policies, and 
practices of their denomination; its history, articles of faith, and practice; and selected social issues. 
 
RS 425  
Senior Capstone Project 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
The Christian studies senior capstone project involves a study of a special topic in Christian studies. 
Students will engage in an in-depth study of that topic resulting in a major paper addressing a theme or 
issue within that topic. (Christian Studies Core.) 
 
RS 445  
Studies in Religious Studies 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Study of special topics of interest in religious studies with the topic changing each time the course is 
offered. 
 
Sociology 
 
SOC 125 
Statistics for Social Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Basic course covering topics of collection, organization and summarization of data; basic probability; 
probability distributions; sampling distributions; confidence intervals; and tests of hypothesis. (Same as 
MATH 125.)  
 
SOC 201 
Introduction to Sociology 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A survey of the basic concepts, theories, methods, and research associated with the sociological analysis 
of society. Emphasis will be placed on the study of primary forms of human association and interaction, as 
well as social structures and processes that affect the individual. 

 
SOC 215 
Introduction to Criminology 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Past and present theories exploring the causes of crime are examined in the context of how to deal with 
crime and criminals in our society. Criminal behavior causes, sociological and psychological, are examined. 
(Same as CJ 215.) 
 
SOC 220 
Social Welfare Policies  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces students to social welfare policies and issues in the United States. The economic, 
religious, political, and other socio-cultural influences of social welfare policies and services, as they relate 
to individual and institutions, are explored. (Same as PSY 220.) 
 
SOC 260 
Marriage and the Family 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is designed to strengthen the student’s knowledge of family dynamics, modes of intervention, 
and the family systems perspective. Intervention theories and practice skills are studied and applied. 
Emphasis is placed on appreciation of diversity in family life and the beginning of competency in problem 
solving with families. Self-awareness about a student’s own family will be required in coursework. Skills in 
interviewing, problem identification, and communication are emphasized, with the primary focus on 
marriage and the family unit.  
 
SOC 290 
Social & Cultural Diversity 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course examines various cultures and diverse societies, with an emphasis on differences in race, age, 
social class, religion, and family. Students will gain insight into how social and cultural differences impact 
an individual’s ability to acclimate into new environments as well as empathize with individuals coming 
into their environment from another culture. (Same as PSY 290.) 
 
SOC 291 
Statistics for Social Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Basic course covering topics of collection, organization and summarization of data; basic probability; 
probability distributions; sampling distributions; confidence intervals; and tests of hypothesis. 
Prerequisite: SOC 201 and MATH 110 or higher. 
 
SOC 301 
Contemporary Social Problems 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
A sociological analysis of such current issues such as war, population, poverty, health, medical care, and 
ageism. This class is intended for sophomores and above. Prerequisite: SOC 201 or consent of 
instructor. 
 
SOC 401 
Social Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an introduction to social psychological theory, research, and application. Topics 
covered include: attitude formation and change, social influence processes, social cognition, moral 
development, interpersonal attraction, aggression, prejudice, and political psychology. Basic social issues, 
concepts, theories, and research findings from the field of psychology are applied to understand major 
social problems confronting the contemporary world, such as genocide, poverty, and international 
conflict. (Same as PSY 401.) Prerequisite: PSY 101 and junior standing. 
 
SOC 445 
Studies in Sociology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
A study of significant topics in sociology may include: poverty, gender issues, ethnicity, discrimination, 
family structure, religion, etc. This class is intended for juniors and seniors only. Can be repeated if the 
topic is different. 
 

 
Spanish 
 
SPAN 101 
Beginning Spanish I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces students to Spanish culture and language through a combination of text, online 
resources and classroom instruction.  Equal emphasis is placed on developing skills in areas of grammar, 
reading, and speaking this increasingly important language.  
 
SPAN 102 
Beginning Spanish II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course continues the practice of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills that are taught in 
SPAN 101. 
 
SPAN 201 
Intermediate Spanish I  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an integrated study of the language and cultures of the Spanish-speaking world.  Accuracy 
in oral, aural, reading, and writing skills will stressed as a means to expression and comprehension of the 
language.  Prerequisite: SPAN 102 or equivalent.  
 
SPAN 202 
Intermediate Spanish II 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course continues the integrated study of the Spanish language and culture.  Prerequisite: SPAN 201 
or equivalent.  
 
Special Education 
 
SPED 103 
 Exceptional Children 
3 hours 
Students explore the characteristics of exceptional students who are included in the mild intervention 
classification, (for example, students with Specific Learning Disabilities, Mild Cognitive Disabilities, 
Emotional Disabilities, Autism, and Other Health Impairments, etc.) and students explore how to 
effectively assist these students in learning. This exploration includes the history of services for children 
with disabilities, as well as theories, practices and teaching techniques for producing optimal growth. 
Students will explore public policy, mainstreaming, inclusion, early intervention, RTI (response to 
intervention), UDL (universal design for learning), and IEPs (individual education plans) 
 
SPED 270  
Methods and Materials for Exceptional Learners  
 
 
     3 hours 
Provides understanding of the development and acquisition of knowledge, as well as an 
appreciation for the ways children learn. Explores and evaluates materials, methods, and 
techniques used to foster learning across the spectrum of exceptionalities. 
 
SPED 284  
Best Practices for Students with Emotional & Behavioral Disorders     3 hours 
Characteristics of the person with emotional disturbance and behavioral disorders. Emphasis on 
social, psychological, and biological theories of causality, assessment, and education, with a variety of 
emotional and/or behavioral problems. 
 
SPED 302  
Diagnostic Assessment  
 
 
 
 
                   3 hours 
Both qualitative and quantitative assessment procedures are studied in diagnosing learning 
problems. Strategies to accommodate special needs students are included. Candidates are expected to be 
able to construct a variety of tests, as well as develop authentic evaluative materials (i.e. portfolio), as well 
as administer and interpret achievement, diagnostic, and intelligence tests. Candidates develop a personal 
philosophy of assessment. (Course taken in lieu of EDUC 230/301 for Special Education majors.) 
 

 
SPED 306  
Legal Issues in Special Education                                                             3 hours 
Explores the laws that relate to special needs learners and their implications in program and 
curricular design. IEPs, due process, and student and parent rights will be studied. Students will 
also study teacher rights and responsibilities as they relate to the law. 
 
SPED 337  
Collaboration and Consultation in Special Education                            3 hours 
This course will focus on the knowledge and skills required by candidates to effectively collaborate with 
teachers, parents and other school personnel to work with Exceptional Students. Emphasizes strategies 
and techniques used in working across all levels of LRE – including inclusion and co-teaching. Candidates 
will learn to work in partnership with other instructors and support personnel to determine adaptation, 
accommodation, and modification needs for individualizing instruction to meet the unique needs of 
exceptional students. 
 
SPED 375  
Classroom and Behavior Management                                                    3 hours 
An in-depth study of behavioral management techniques. Exploration of ways to adapt the 
techniques to be used with a specific student. Review of psychological processes involved in 
punishment and reinforcement. Field experiences required. PI Training Included.  (SPED majors take this 
course in lieu of EDUC 315.) 
 
Sports Administration 
 
SA 101  
Introduction to Sports Administration  
 
      
   
 3 hours 
This course is a basic overview and preface to the widely growing sports industry. An examination of the 
broad spectrum of career opportunities available in the sports administration profession is covered. 
Special emphasis is on career planning, sport management terminology, and an overview of specific skills 
and knowledge required for professional preparation in sports administration. 
 
SA 301  
Sports Law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3 hours 
This course focuses on legal issues applicable to sport administration, including tort law, risk 
management, negligence, and constitutional law. Relevant legal cases and concepts will be incorporated. 
Additional areas of study include: regulations of amateur athletics, public relations of sports activities, 
legal relationships in professional sports, enforcement of professional sports contracts, antitrust aspects of 
sports activities, and liability for injuries in sports activities. Prerequisite: SA 101. 
 
SA 310  
E-Sports Management  
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides a basic overview of the industry, including various levels of esports, culture, and 
social issues. Students will explore the interests and concerns of various tiers of stakeholders—from title 
publishers and event organizers to leagues, sponsors, fans, and more—and learn about governance at 
multiple levels, from the international level to college conferences. A full look at the marketing engine of 
esports examines sponsorship opportunities, esports events and venues, and communications at all levels, 
including broadcasting, analytics, and social media. This course addresses managerial and business issues 
associated with running an esports-related entity, including financial and legal concepts as well as team 
and player management. The course concludes by examining careers found in thevarious segments of the 
industry and looking at the future of esports. 
 
SA 330  
Sports Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course provides an overview of sports marketing as a component of an integrated marketing 
communication strategy. Students study the history and contemporary application of sports marketing in 

 
business. The curriculum addresses corporate as well as sporting property use of sports marketing 
strategies to achieve business objectives. The course examines strategies that address critical business 
constituencies, consumers, trade factors, employees, and the financial community. Also covered are sports 
marketing within the context of special sporting event sponsorships, professional sports teams as well as 
governing organizations, sports media (broadcast, print, social media, and Internet), licensing, and 
hospitality.  
 
SA 425  
Sports Capstone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course introduces the student to the structure and administration of physical education and athletics. 
Some laboratory administration is involved. The responsibilities of key personnel, including the athletic 
director, business manager, sports information director, and athletic trainer, are presented and discussed. 
Prerequisites: SA 101 and MGT 201. 
 
SA 445  
Seminar in Sports Administration 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
This course is an examination of current trends and issues in the study of sports administration. The field 
of sports administration is in a dynamic state. New theories, practices, and processes are being developed. 
Different perspectives on these new ideas will be analyzed by drawing on current literature and research 
for in-depth consideration of these contemporary issues. Prerequisites: SA 101 and MGT 201. 
 
University Studies 
 
T 105  
Study Skills 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
A credit, referral course to assist students having difficulty in basic subjects or needing help in the 
acquisition of study skills. 
 
T 111  
Introduction to College Correspondence 
 
 
 
1 hour 
The foundations course for new college correspondence students meets the need for incarcerated 
students located in correctional facilities.  This course addresses the assignment requirements based on 
no access to internet and limited access to library resources.  Sections of the student catalogue, a 
correspondence student handbook, information on FERPA, APA guidelines, and preparation of an 
education plan for success are included in this course. 
 
T 425  
Senior Seminar  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 hours 
Focuses on contemporary world problems in light of one’s experience in higher education. Taken during 
the senior year. The topics considered may change each semester. Conducted by a faculty committee. 
 
T 445  
Independent Study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-3 hours 
A student possessing a 3.0 GPA or better and who is a last semester junior or in the senior year may apply 
to take Independent Study. The student will prepare a fully outlined proposal for the course and submit it 
to the Provost together with a request for a faculty tutor. If the Provost approves and the requested 
faculty tutor agrees, the student may then pursue his or her study under the tutor’s supervision for one (1) 
semester or a longer pre-arranged time. Full tuition for the course is charged and the study cannot 
substitute for any required course in a student’s program. No faculty member may serve as a tutor to 
more than three students at any one time. At the conclusion of this course, it is expected that a general 
invitation will be extended to the university community to hear the results. 
 
 
UNIV 100 
Orientation to Moodle  
 
 
 
 
 
0 hours 
This course explores basic navigation in the Moodle online environment as a Learning Management 
System (LMS). Students may use Moodle in face-to-face, hybrid and/or online classes, so knowing how to 

 
access materials, complete assignments and review progress is key to student success. Completion of 
these modules in this course will allow the student to become familiar with the most common functions 
and operations of Moodle to better support the student’s learning experience.  Credits: 0.  Pass/Fail. 
 
UNIV 101 
First Year Experience  
 
 
 
 
 
1 hour 
Introduction to Oakland City University and the undergraduate experience with a specific focus on 
academic success, campus involvement, and community engagement. Students will discuss issues of value 
and behavior in the college setting, discover what resources are available to them, and learn what it 
means to integrate themselves into the campus and surrounding communities. Required of all full-time 
first year students. 
 
 
