ACCOUNTING (ACCT)
2301. (2301) INTRODUCTION TO FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING
This is an introduction to financial accounting that focuses on the preparation and 
understanding of accounting reports prepared for investors, financial analysts, creditors 
and other external users. Generally accepted accounting principles and other basic 
accounting concepts are studied.
2302. (2302) INTRODUCTION TO MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING
This is an introduction to managerial accounting that focuses on the preparation and 
understanding of accounting reports prepared for managers and other internal users. 
Concepts covered include cost accounting methodology, relevant cost analysis, cost 
behavior, cost-volume-profit analysis, activity-based costing, operational and capital 
budgeting. 
3301. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I
This course is an intensive study of financial accounting and the preparation of financial 
accounting reports. Concepts covered include the accounting cycle, conceptual framework 
of accounting theory, FASB Codification, financial statement preparation, accounting for 
current and long-term assets, present value computations and applications, depreciation, 
asset impairments, and intangible assets. Key differences and similarities between U.S. 
GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) are covered. 
3302. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II
This course is a continuation of ACCT 3301 and covers such topics as valuation of 
liabilities and investments, financial reporting of stockholder’s equity, income recognition 
and measurement of investments in debt and equity securities, special rules for revenue 
recognition, accounting for tax carrybacks and carryforwards, pension accounting, 
leases, accounting changes and error analysis, statement of cash flows, and full disclosure 
requirements in accordance with GAAP. 
3304. COST ACCOUNTING
This is a study of advanced cost-accounting systems, including cost behavior, cost 
allocation, unit cost determination, activity costing and cost-volume-profit analysis. 

3305. FUNDAMENTALS OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX
This is an introduction to the basic principles and concepts of individual federal income 
taxation. Emphasis on tax planning and preparation for tax problems. A minimum of 
one credit hour of this course will be devoted to tax research and analysis. 
3306. CORPORATE AND PARTNERSHIP TAXATION
This course covers the fundamentals of corporate and partnership federal income taxation. 
Includes corporate reorganizations, liquidations, partnerships, and ‘‘S” corporations. A 
minimum of one credit hour of this course will be devoted to tax research and analysis. 

3308. REGULATORY ACCOUNTING
This course studies the accounting and financial statements of governmental, fund and not-
for-profit accounting; such as hospitals, churches, colleges, governmental organizations, 
and other private and public not-for-profit organizations. Additionally; the application, 
proposals and current status of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), will 
be researched. 
4301. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING I
This course covers the equity method of accounting, business combinations, consolidated 
financial statements, foreign currency translations of financial statements, and an 
introduction to QuickBooks accounting software. 
4303. AUDITING THEORY AND PRACTICE
This is an introduction to the concepts, standards, and techniques employed by 
independent public accountants in the examination of and reporting on financial 
statements. A minimum of one credit hour of this course will be devoted to accounting 
and business communications. 
4306. ACCOUNTING ETHICS
This course is a study of the ethical concepts and considerations that govern the day 
to day activities of a professional accountant, with emphasis placed on professional 
responsibilities as prescribed by various governing bodies. This course meets requirements 
of the Texas State Board of Public Accountancy.
4308. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING II
This course covers partnership accounting, interim and segment financial reporting, 
governmental accounting, not-for-profit accounting, International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS), and an introduction to QuickBooks accounting software. 
4370. TOPICS IN ACCOUNTING
This is a selected topics in the field of accounting, auditing, or taxation. Topics will vary; 
course may be repeated when topics vary.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN ACCOUNTING
This course is a supervised field employment experience which provides the opportunity 
for the student to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. 
hours of upper-level accounting courses and an approved internship application.
5301. ACCOUNTING FOR DECISION-MAKING
This MBA course is a study of accounting applications and concepts relative to 
management decision-making. Students examine the key financial statements: Balance 
Sheet, Income Statement, Statement of Cash Flow, and Statement of Retained Earnings 
in order to develop, evaluate, and measure business decisions. Managerial accounting 
is the primary focus; however, students will examine financial accounting procedures 
and taxing implications in constructing decision options. 
MBA program.
1170. TOPICS IN ART
This short-term travel/topics course will allow study tours of at least seven days to domestic 
or foreign destinations, with a view to providing the student first-hand encounters with 
art of the great galleries and museums of the world. Students will be enrolled well in 
advance of the travel and will be responsible for travel expenses, which may be partially 
subsidized by the University. This course may be scheduled at any time during the annual 
school year, but must be attached to a specific semester for credit purposes. A writing 
component is required. May be repeated when topics vary.
1302. PRINCIPLES OF DRAWING
This is a studio course concentrating on the development of basic drawing skills, use 
of materials and the organization of composition on the picture plane. This is NOT 
recommended for non-Art majors. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. (3-3).
1320. PRINCIPLES OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL DESIGN
This is a studio course concentrating on elements and principles of visual organization 
applied to three-dimensional concepts and their exploration within spatial environments. 
Students solve problems by organizing and constructing three-dimensional forms. This 
is NOT recommended for non-Art majors. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. (3-3).
1340. INTRODUCTION TO THE VISUAL ARTS
This course offers a diverse investigation of art and culture from the historical and 
contemporary perspectives. It is a discussion of the contributions of the arts to the 
understanding of aesthetics, observation of historic styles, traditional and contemporary 
techniques, and the influence of cultural media. More time is allotted for this course to 
allow for field trips and assignments in various media. This is an introductory art class 
recommended to fulfill the core fine arts requirement for non-art majors.
1350. COLOR THEORY
This course surveys basic knowledge of color theory useful to a number of applied 
fields, including painting, design, theater, photography, ceramics, computer graphics, 
psychology, and marketing. Instructional methods will include lecture, demonstration, 
audio/visual presentations, studio exercises, guest lectures and field trips. It is required 
for the graphic design degree and fulfills the core fine arts requirement for most degree 
plans. This is NOT recommended for non-Art majors. Some art supplied are required. A 
studio supplies fee will be assessed.
2290. EXPLORATORY INTERNSHIP
Faculty members coordinate the rising internship opportunities with mid-program 
students to shadow and assist arts management professionals in their work place. This 
course provides the opportunity to explore areas of the arts in which the student is 
interested in concentrating their focus. Students are required to include two or more types 
of arts organizations as part of their course research and experience. The field experience 
is sixty hours; no one individual organizational experience may be less than 16 hours. 
Students are required to keep a log, communicate weekly with the supervising instructor, 
and maintain attendance requirements. 
of instructor.
2310. PHOTOGRAPHY
This is an introduction to the principles of photography including the use and functions 
of the camera, the aesthetics of photography, composition and basic techniques in 
black and white darkroom procedure. Assignments are in film processing, printing and 
enlargement, and presentation. 
A studio supplies fee will be assessed.
2322. INTRODUCTION TO CLAY
This is an introduction to hand-building methods, use of the electric potter’s wheel, glaze 
application, and surface finishing techniques in creating and emphasizing the aesthetic 
appreciation of ceramic art forms. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. (3-3).
2330. INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY
This course is an introduction to digital photography, its applications and its place in 
the realm of the professional graphic design and visual art worlds. The course explores 
digital camera mechanics, capture, storage and digital work flow, basic digital editing 
techniques, and application, introduction to Photoshop Image editing software, and ethics 
of digital photography. This course is designed for majors and non-majors. A digital 
camera with the option for manual controls is required. To participate in this course, 
on-line students must have access to the latest version of Adobe Photoshop (the required 
editing software). A studio supplies fee will be assessed.
2340. ART HISTORY I
This course includes a Formalist survey of Western visual arts from Pre-history through 
the Middle Ages designed to enable students to recognize and appreciate artworks and 
other artifacts from cultures of the past, to grasp the perspective of time, and to develop 
the ability to verbalize about works of art on at least three levels: historical, descriptive, 
and evaluative.
2341. ART HISTORY II
This course includes a survey of Western visual arts from the Renaissance to the Post-
modern era intended to inspire an understanding and appreciation of the essential place 
of art in the experience of human life and to help students to develop and communicate 
ideas about visual culture. This course may include an optional content-oriented travel/
research component during the spring break.
2351. INTRODUCTION TO ARTS MANAGEMENT
This course covers the basic principles, concepts, processes, and practices relating to 
organizations in the arts industry including structure of the arts industry and specifically 
non-profits, organization structures, planning, leadership, staffing, financial management, 
economic impact, fundraising, advocacy, and marketing development.
2370. TOPICS IN ART
This course is a specific study of particular topics in art. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
2371. TOPICS IN ART HISTORY
Topics in Art History provides an in-depth study of art history not possible in the basic 
survey courses ART 2340 and 2341. Topics may include focus on a particular period or 
aspect of art history, or may include surveys of art history such as Oriental art, Native 
American art, and Art of Latin America. May be repeated when topics vary.
3310. ADVANCED DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY
This course is an advanced study of digital photography incorporating a deeper study 
of camera techniques, image manipulation, advanced Photoshop techniques, production 
of output process, image correction process, scanning and other advanced imaging 
techniques. A digital SLR camera is required for this course. 
with a grade of a “C” or better. A studio supplies fee will be assessed.
3311. PRINTMAKING
This is an introductory studio course in basic printmaking processes, history and 
aesthetics. 
3324. INTERMEDIATE CERAMICS
This course is a continuation of ART 2322 with the continued use of the potter’s wheel 
for production of creative ceramic art forms. It includes plaster mould work, glazing and 
slab construction. 
3340. THE ART OF TEXAS: PAST AND PRESENT
This course is a cultural and historical survey of the art and artifacts produced in Texas 
from prehistoric times to the present day. It is intended to serve the arts management 
major in fulfillment of the B.A. in Arts Management degree, but is also recommended to 
fulfill an upper-level elective or minor, specialization, or concentration. The content of 
the course is richly visual and historical, but also experiential, incorporating field trips 
and visits to historic locations, museums and exhibitions. This emphasis on activities is 
to allow the student to see firsthand how priceless artifacts and objects of art are curated, 
cataloged, and exhibited.
3360. PRODUCTION FACILITIES FUNDAMENTALS
This course is a study of the operation of arts facilities, both visual and performing. 
Students will be introduced to topics such as museology and artist-gallery relationships 
as well as principles and practices of effective management of museums and galleries. 
The course will also exam the performing arts industry and introduce the student to artist-
management relationships, booking and contracts, performing arts unions, royalty and 
rights licensing practices, tour management, and box office management. 
3370. TOPICS IN ART
This course is a specific study of particular topics in Art. 
4325. ADVANCED CERAMICS
This is a course with emphasis on wheel production, surface decoration, and kiln firing. 

4340. ADVANCE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES – R
This studio course explores various types of historical photographic processes, which 
may include gum bichromate, cyanotype, bromoil and Van Dyke Brown prints. Students 
work on individual projects that examine historical, technical and aesthetic approaches 
to photography. Digital, analog, and combinations of the two processes will be explored 
along with traditional and new output options for printing. This course may be repeated 
for credit for extended research. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
2310, 3310 and consent of instructor.
4341. PHOTOGRAPHIC DESIGN AND CONCEPTS – R
This course will emphasize contemporary composition and visual communication 
through a studio experience while developing the student’s individual photographic style. 
Students will research historical references in photography, prominent photographers, 
movements and theories which constitute the foundations of photography. Students 
will study lighting, composition, space, color, contrast, time, and psychological impact 
as applied to photographic medium. This course will assist conceptual direction and 
development of critical skills necessary for creating a cohesive body of work. This course 
may be repeated for credit for extended research. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 

4342.  PROFESSIONAL PHOTOGRAPHIC THEORY 
AND PRACTICE
This course is a topics course designed for, though not necessarily limited to, the 
Photography Minor to familiarize and develop professional standards, practices and 
expectations from within the field of photography and other related craft.
Some examples of course work may include print and video, branding, art direction 
in photography, video producing and directing, presenting on camera, interviewing 
skills/techniques, text to fit conceptual imagery, introduction to magazine/book photo 
production, creating production budgets, contracts, model releases and schedules, content 
distribution, imagery, drone photography for professional applications, and developing a 
web portfolio for self-promotion. 
minor, permission from instructor may be required.
4352. BUILDING PARTICIPATION IN THE ARTS
This course is an exploration of arts advocacy and practices to increase cultural participation 
and develop arts audiences. Approaches to promoting the arts, developing audiences 
through marketing, using various public relations and advertising tools and techniques 
will be studied. In the course, students will assess current and potential audiences and 
demographics, examine lifestyle, leisure time habits, national and international trends 
and social values, and participate in different types of arts experiences. 
2351 and Junior standing.
4370. TOPICS IN ART – R
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in art. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4397. ARTS MANAGEMENT
This course offers a survey of public and private visual and performing arts organizations. 
Course content will include a study of the relationship between arts management and 
artistic production. This study will also include an overview of career management 
options in fields of creative endeavor. 
consent of instructor.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN ART
Subject areas in art not offered as regular courses may be investigated by the directed 
study to accomplish personal needs of the student. Approval before registration by the 
supervising instructor and the appropriate dean are required. 
status with the completed basic art courses. The course may be repeated once with a 
change in focus.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN ART
Faculty members coordinate the program with upper-level students to work part-time 
with cooperating employers. This course provides the opportunity to apply prior learning 
to supervised practical field circumstances and gain employment experience. Students 
are required to keep a log, communicate weekly with the supervising instructor, and 
maintain attendance requirements. Although the faculty will assist, it is the responsibility 
of the student to acquire the internship. 
consent of instructor.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN ART
This is the culmination of the degree program. This capstone course is the visualization 
of the thesis developed and presented during DESN 4360: Professional Portfolio with 
emphasis on visual and verbal communication. The student will produce an exhibition 
of their work that demonstrates their creativity and professionalism as a designer. The 
student will finalize their professional print and website portfolio begun in DESN 4360: 
Professional Portfolio. A senior exit interview will be conducted at the end of the semester. 

proposals in the semester before the Senior Project course is to be taken.
1100. HUMAN BIOLOGY LAB

1101. INTRODUCTION TO ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
This is a one-hour elective course designed to give students the background to 
successfully complete BIOL 2301 and 2101, 2302 and 2102, Anatomy and Physiology I 
and II. Students who should take this course include those with limited backgrounds in 
Biology or Chemistry, who have been out of school for an extended period of time, or 
who desire an overview of Anatomy and Physiology. Does not fulfill requirements for the 
biology major or fulfill natural science requirement in core.
1102. CONCEPTS OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE LABORATORY
This is a laboratory study of biology designed to provide students with basic knowledge 
and laboratory skills useful in modern biology.
1103. ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY LABORATORY
This course is a laboratory study of the diversity of organisms and their relationship to 
the environment.
1106. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE LAB
1107. PRACTICAL RESEARCH EXPERIENCE-R
This course is a hands-on experience with the basics of scientific research. Students taking 
this course will participate in research teams helping upper-class students and faculty 
mentors with the execution of established research projects outside of the classroom. It 
provides an in-depth understanding of the materials and methods involved in one or more 
tracks of scientific research. Students may work on a single project or up to 3 projects 
throughout one semester. May be repeated.
1195. READINGS IN MEDICAL HUMANITIES
This course will introduce students to popular themes in medical humanities, to engage 
in intellectual discussions of science/health care concepts, and to improve reading and 
writing skills. 
1203. INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH SCIENCES
Provides description of health care professions, education and licensing requirements, 
employment trends and salary ranges for health related careers. Students will have 
exposure to the history and development of health care. Health care issues will be 
examined with an emphasis on ethics and cultural diversity. Students will acquire a 
thorough understanding of HIPAA regulations.
1217. PROFESSIONAL SKILLS BIOLOGY 1: FOUNDATIONS
This immersive introduction to the scientific process allows students to explore the 
scientific method, design and participate in conducting experiments, gain skills with the 
metric system and manipulative laboratory techniques, and explore ongoing conversations 
about science through examination of published literature. Students are introduced to 
formal presentations in both written and oral media. 
1227.  PROFESSIONAL SKILLS IN BIOLOGY 2:  
PROBLEM-SOLVING
Building on Professional Skills in Biology 1, students will take a more active role in 
planning, designing, and executing laboratory and field experiments through the 
implementation of an original research proposal. They will add basic skills in data analysis 
and hone their skills in written and oral scientific communication. Data management will 
be introduced. 
1270. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY
This course will explore a specific topic* related to biology in a seminar style. Students 
will explore both the origins of scholarship on this topic as well as current events related 
to it. They will apply skills relevant to studying and communicating about this topic 
individually and in groups. They will explore the value of evidence-based perspectives 
in discourse and in decision-making, and relate to the topic to its evolutionary context. 
*topic to be chosen by students, not by faculty.
1300. HUMAN BIOLOGY
This is a one semester study of biological principles particularly as they apply to humans. 
Does not fulfill requirements for the biology major. Students who already have credit for 
BIOL 1301 or BIOL 2301 and 2101 may not ordinarily receive credit for BIOL 1300. 

1301. (1406) CONCEPTS OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE
This course is a conceptual approach designed to provide students with an organizing 
framework for understanding and further learning in biology. If intended to fulfill the 
4-hour science 
1302. ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY
This course is a survey of diversity of life with emphasis upon structure, function, 
adaptations, and relationship of organisms to the environment.
1305. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
This purpose of this course is to encourage all students to really think about science by 
using historical perspectives in science to examine our beliefs about the discipline today. 
Exploration of challenges stemming from evidence, technology, society, theology, and 
philosophy of the practice of science will be central. This course will advance scientific 
literacy, familiarize the student with major scientific issues facing society today, develop 
student appreciation of how science can inform policies, and explore present day ethical 
dilemmas in science and technology affecting the world.
1306. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
This course studies major issues arising from interface of society and environmental, 
natural sciences, with emphasis upon nature of scientific knowledge; its usefulness and 
limitations in decision-making and problem-solving. Intended for partial fulfillment of 
basic natural science distribution requirement. 
BIOL 1106.
2101. HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I LAB

2102. HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II LAB

2105. GENETICS LAB

2107. EXAMINING RESEARCH – R
This course is a journal club-style seminar focusing on the scope (including limitations) 
of scientific research through examination of published literature. Specifically students 
will address writing style, experimental design, how hypotheses are tested in the real 
world, presentation of results, and the types of conclusions that can be made. Different 
sections will have different themes. May be repeated.
2117. PROFESSIONAL SKILLS IN BIOLOGY 3: INTEGRATING
Building on Professional Skills in Biology 2, students will design two novel experiments 
and explore relationships between the scientific process in the lab and in the field. 
Students will refine and present work from Professional Skills in Biology 1 and 2, and 
explore its relationship to published works. 
2127.  PROFESSIONAL SKILLS IN BIOLOGY 4:  
INDEPENDENT RESEARCH
Synthesizing skills from Professional Skills in Biology 1-3, students will statistically 
analyze and present the results of a novel experiment in both written and oral media. 
These results will be the foundation for a new research proposal to be completed in this 
course, but that may be used for research in BIOL 3307 or BIOL 4399. 
2301. HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I
Human Anatomy and Physiology is a two semester laboratory course in which the human 
body is studied systematically. The first semester includes study of organization of the 
body, cell transport, homeostasis, tissues, integument, skeletal system, muscular system 
and nervous system. 
2302. HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II
Human Anatomy and Physiology is a two semester laboratory course in which the human 
body is studied systematically. This course includes study of the following systems: 
endocrine, respiratory, circulatory, immune, digestive, excretory, and reproductive. 

2305. GENETICS
This course covers classical and molecular genetics. 
of biology or consent of the instructor. Concurrent enrollment in lab BIOL 2105.
2331. NUTRITION IN THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
The purpose of this course is to explore the various nutrients, their sources, digestion, 
absorption, metabolism, interaction, storage, and excretion. Emphasis is given to the role 
that nutrition plays in the healthcare delivery system. Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2301 or 2302 
and CHEM 1301 or 1303.
2350. WRITING AND RESEARCH IN SCIENCE
This course examines the standards and styles for various kinds of writing about biology. 
The basic elements of biological research, its planning and reporting are included. 

2360. MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY
This is a course designed to build the science vocabulary; that is, to increase the number 
of words whose meaning can be recognized or derived and to learn to use scientific words 
correctly and effectively. This course concentrates on medical terms, but other science 
terms will be learned as well. The course focuses on the Latin and Greek elements in the 
English language in order to illustrate how words are built, how they are spelled, how 
they are used, and what they mean.
2370. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY
This is an intensive study of a specific biological topic. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
3104. ADVANCED GENETICS LAB

3106. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY LAB

3108. ANIMAL BEHAVIOR LAB

3114. GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY LAB

3142. FIELD ECOLOGY – R LAB

3144. BIOLOGY OF A MAJOR VERTEBRATE GROUP LAB

3145. HERPETOLOGY LAB
Herpetology covers the biology of amphibians and reptiles, with an emphasis on field 
identification. 
in lab BIOL 3145.
3146. MAMMALOGY LAB
Mammalogy covers the biology of mammals, with an emphasis on field identification. 

3346.
3147. ORNITHOLOGY LAB
Ornithology covers the biology of birds, with an emphasis on field identification. 

3347.
3148. GENERAL ENTOMOLOGY LABORATORY
This is the laboratory that accompanies General Entomology. This course is a survey 
of the biology of insects, with an emphasis on biodiversity and evolution. In addition, 
aspects of behavior, ecology, morphology, and physiology will be covered. Laboratory 
will emphasize collection techniques, generalized insect morphology, identification of 
orders and families, and behavior. 
Concurrent enrollment in BIOL 3348.
3151. MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LAB

3152. CELL BIOLOGY LAB

3155. INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY LABORATORY
This is the laboratory that accompanies BIOL 3355-Invertebrate Biology. This course is 
a survey of the biology of invertebrate animals, excluding insects, with an emphasis on 
biodiversity and evolution. In addition, aspects of behavior, ecology, morphology, and 
physiology will be covered. A laboratory for this course is being proposed separately that 
will emphasize collection techniques, generalized morphology, identification of phyla, 
classes and orders, and behavior. 
3170. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY LAB

3270. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY
This is an intensive study of a specific biological topic. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
3304. ADVANCED GENETICS
This course covers current techniques in genetics and genomics and the social, ethical 
and legal issues surrounding genetic technology. Topics will include DNA sequencing 
technology, genome structure and evolution, genetics and disease, personal genomics 
and the human microbiome. 
in lab BIOL 3104.
3306. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY
This is an advanced study of the physiology of human systems, including weekly 
laboratory session. This course is intended for students preparing for graduate or 
professional school in the health sciences. See EXSI 3306. 
2101, 2302 and 2102 and Junior standing, or consent of instructor. Concurrent enrollment 
in lab BIOL 3106.
3307. RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT – R
This course includes experience with design, execution, leadership and presentation of 
scientific research. Students taking this course will participate in research teams helping 
under-class students and faculty mentors with execution of novel or established research 
projects outside of the classroom. Provides an in-depth, experiential learning approach to 
the justification, approach, analysis, preparation and dissemination of scientific research.
3308. ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
This course explores the evolutionary, morphological and motivational causes of 
behavior patterns in animals. 
in lab BIOL 3108.
3310. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
This course is designed to provide an in-depth study of the cellular and systemic 
physiology of pathology affecting the human body. Emphasis will be placed on conditions 
in which the body deviates from homeostasis. All organ systems and interrelationships 
between organ systems will be covered. The course will build on knowledge developed 
from Anatomy and Physiology I and II. 
2302, BIOL 2102.
3314. GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
This is a study of microorganisms as representative organisms. Application of basic 
biological concepts to the study of microorganisms, with emphasis on allied health 
topics. 
in lab BIOL 3114.
3340. EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
This course is a study of the evidence supporting the common ancestry of life and 
the forces that shape organisms over time. 
of instructor.
3342. FIELD ECOLOGY – R
This course is a study of the interactions between living organisms and their environment. 

3343. CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
This course concerns the principles and techniques of preserving threatened and 
endangered biological resources. 
3344. BIOLOGY OF MAJOR VERTEBRATE GROUP
This course covers the biology of a major vertebrate group. May be repeated for credit 
when topics vary. 
in lab BIOL 3144.
3345. HERPETOLOGY
Herpetology covers the biology of amphibians and reptiles, with an emphasis on field 
identification. 
in lab BIOL 3145.
3346. MAMMALOGY
Mammalogy covers the biology of mammals, with an emphasis on field identification. 

3146.
3347. ORNITHOLOGY
Ornithology covers the biology of birds, with an emphasis on field identification. 

3147.
3348. GENERAL ENTOMOLOGY
This course is a survey of the biology of insects, with an emphasis on biodiversity and 
evolution. In addition, aspects of behavior, ecology, morphology, and physiology will be 
covered. A laboratory for this course is being proposed separately that will emphasize 
collection techniques, generalized insect morphology, identification of orders and 
families, and behavior. 
enrollment in BIOL 3148.
3351. MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
This course is a study of the molecular basis of living organisms. 
chemistry and BIOL 2305 and 2105 or consent of the instructor. Concurrent enrollment 
in lab BIOL 3151.
3352. CELL BIOLOGY
This is a study of structure and function of cells as units of living matter. 
3150.
3355. INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY
This course is a survey of the biology of invertebrate animals, excluding insects, with 
an emphasis on biodiversity and evolution. In addition, aspects of behavior, ecology, 
morphology, and physiology will be covered. A laboratory for this course is being 
proposed separately that will emphasize collection techniques, generalized morphology, 
identification of phyla, classes and orders, and behavior. 
consent of instructor.
3361. DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY
This course aims to integrate organismal, cellular, genetic and molecular approaches to 
the study of animal development. We will analyze several topics including gametogenesis, 
fertilization, gastrulation, organogenesis, sex determination and developmental gene 
regulation in a variety of model organisms and systems. 
3370. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY
This is an intensive study of a specific biological topic. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
3374. IMMUNOLOGY
This course will examine the structure and function of immune system components. 
Innate and adaptive immunity will be studied including Cytokines and The Complement 
System, B and T Cell Development, Major Histocompatibility Complex, Monoclonal 
Antibodies, Diagnostic and Research Methods, Vaccine Development, and Immune 
Disorders and Disease. 
3375. NEUROBIOLOGY
This course will present studies investigating the development and function of the nervous 
system. The goal is to understand the molecular and cellular processes that underlie the 
development, maintenance, and plasticity of neurons and synapses. Topics covered will 
include how neurons are generated, how neurons find their synaptic targets, how synapses 
are formed and modified to generate synaptic circuits, plasticity that underlies formation 
of memories, neurodegenerative disorders, and potential for regeneration. 
3376. FUNDAMENTALS OF NEUROSCIENCE
This course will explore the structure and function of the nervous system of humans and 
other animals by examining the molecules, cells and circuits that are involved in directing 
behavior. We will build on this knowledge to explore how sensory systems acquire 
information about the environment and how different systems underlying learning and 
memory lead to decision making. Understanding the mechanisms by which our brains 
collect, process and act upon information is critical to understanding both ourselves and 
our world. In this course we will emphasize how the nervous system is built during 
development, how it changes with experience throughout life, how it functions in normal 
behavior, and how it is disrupted by injury and disease.
4195.  READINGS IN POPULAR LITERATURE  
IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES
This is a study of specific popular book about natural science. Author will be invited 
for a seminar. Offered as circumstances permit. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4396. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN HEALTH SCIENCES
This course is a supervised field experience in health sciences which provides the 
opportunity for the student to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. Student 
will be able to learn about multiple disciplines in one health care setting. 135 hours 
required, 90 hours of which need to be in the practical internship. 
standing.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN BIOLOGY
This course involves learning biology in a work setting. Students are placed in a workplace 
and learn how biology is applied in that specific setting. 135 hours are required, 90 hours 
of which need to be in the practical internship.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN BIOLOGY-R
This is an independent investigation culminating in a written paper. May involve 
laboratory and library research.
BUSINESS (BSAD)
Schreiner University offers a Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) degree with 
majors in Accounting, Finance, Management, and Marketing. The Bachelor of Business 
Administration (BBA) degree focuses on ethical decision-making, leadership integrity, 
professionalism, critical thinking, research and analytical skills, and the interpersonal 
skills essential for careers in accounting, finance, information systems, management, 
and marketing.
Within the BBA degree, Schreiner University offers minors in Accounting, Finance, 
Management, and Marketing to business students. A minor in Business is also offered to 
non-business degree seeking students.
Schreiner also offers a Bachelor of Arts in Business. It is designed with a more general 
concentration in business related subjects.
The Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree is a program with an emphasis on 
Ethical Leadership, Quality, and Decision-Making. The Master of Business Administration 
(MBA) program is structured to enable graduates to succeed in the competitive global and 
technology driven business environment. The program involves rigorous problem solving 
assignments, extensive business writing, professional presentations, computer literacy, 
empirical research, business simulations, and team projects that mirror contemporary 
business environments.
Undergraduate students have an optional BBA degree track that will offer a new student 
the opportunity to earn a BBA degree and a MBA degree within a five year period 
from the time they are admitted to the University as a freshman. The program is a fully 
online program.
All BBA majors and the MBA consists of a combination of universal Business 
Administration courses (BSAD) and specific business discipline courses in Accounting 
(ACCT), Finance (FIN), Management (MGMT), and Marketing (MKTG).
The MBA in Ethical Leadership degree consists of the following courses: ACCT 5301, 
MGMT 5303, MGMT 5304, MKTG 5311, FIN 5312, MGMT 5321, MGMT 5322, 
MGMT 5323, BSAD 5324, IS 5331, BSAD 5332, MGMT 5341.
1301. INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS
This is a study and survey of the functional areas of business with particular emphasis 
on the role of business in American society, various dimensions of business, business 
careers, and techniques of analysis used in business. The course introduces the importance 
of ethics, leadership integrity, and professionalism. Course may include simulation or 
gaming exercises.
1331. PROFESSIONAL SKILLS
This course provides students with fundamental skills and concepts that will be useful 
for them as students and will enhance their professional capabilities after graduation. 
The course provides instruction in the use of MS Excel for computations and problem 
solving. The curriculum also includes time management, information sourcing, effective 
written and oral communication, including APA style formatting and citation, teamwork, 
leadership, value, the importance of character, accounting tools, and personal financial 
management.
2331. ECONOMICS
This course examines fundamental concepts of macro and micro economics that includes 
supply and demand, prices and unemployment, fiscal and monetary policies, competition, 
consumer behavior and regulations.
3311. BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS AND LEGAL INSTRUMENTS
This course examines business forms, including agency, partnership, and corporations. 
Also covered are the law of sales, commercial paper, creditors’ rights, and secured 
transactions.
4321. BUSINESS RESEARCH – R
This is a study of research principles and tools that are typically used in business to 
efficiently and effectively plan, collect, organize, and assimilate information in order to 
make informed business decisions. Students are exposed to the methods of design for 
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods of research. Students will fully develop a 
business research proposal during the course. 
MGMT 2341, FIN 2342, MATH 2330.
4331. BUSINESS STRATEGIES
This course focuses on the analysis of the firm’s internal and external environments 
in order to achieve competitive advantage and earn above-average returns. Students 
explore business and corporate-level strategies, competitive rivalry, acquisitions and 
restructuring, alliances, corporate governance, organizational structure and controls, 
international strategy, entrepreneurial attitude in competitive planning, and strategic 
change through leadership. Students will engage in teams in the Capstone online business 
simulation where they will manage a technology company over a simulated 8-year period 
and compete against other 4-year university teams from around the world. 
ACCT 2301, BSAD 2331, MKTG 2340, MGMT 2341, and FIN 2342.
4342. ENTREPRENEURSHIP
This course addresses the identification and analysis of entrepreneurial opportunities, 
development of business plans, and issues unique to new business startups. The course 
focus will be on managing small businesses with special emphasis on marketing and 
financial management. 
2341, and FIN 2342.
4351. QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN BUSINESS
This course is designed to provide students a foundation in the analytical decision making 
practices in business organizations. Students will learn to solve business problems 
through computer modeling techniques. Topics include: decision analysis, decision 
trees, linear programming, optimization, sensitivity analysis, estimation and forecasting, 
inventory control models, queuing models, PERT/CPM, transportation, transshipment 
and assignment. Extensive application of computer assisted analysis and modeling is 
included. The major field exam in Business is required in this course. 
BSAD 1331, MATH 1311, and MATH 2330.
5001. GASTRONOMY AND WINE VINTAGES
Students will receive an introduction into the world of wine and important wine 
producing areas. The course deals with understanding terms you would find on wine 
labels, identification of aromas and flavors. Pairing wine with food, the etiquette one 
uses with different cultures in the hospitality industry. 
program.
5002. NEW TRENDS IN HOSPITALITY
This course focuses on burgeoning trends in the hospitality industry, tracking and 
studying historical trends, and predicting future trends. We will study a variety of trends 
in varying industries globally and in the U.S. Students will learn the importance of 
staying competitive in a digital environment. 
5003. SUSTAINABLE HOSPITALITY
This course is meant to educate a new generation of hospitality students who will have 
insight into the growing ecology/sustainable hotel business. This course will train and 
teach students expertise in promoting, developing and maintaining a sustainable approach 
to Hospitality and explore various business models. 
program.
5010.  SALES AND MARKETING MANAGEMENT  
FOR HOSPITALITY
This course is designed to provide an overview of selling and sales management applied 
in the Hospitality Industry. Students will learn sales and marketing theory and practice, as 
well as techniques of sales management. The goal of the course is to examine the elements 
of an effective Hospitality sales force. 
5101. GLOBAL HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT
This course emphasizes on the knowledge a global hospitality manager needs to succeed. 
We will study a variety of hospitality businesses in foreign and domestic markets. The 
course will provide an understanding of the economics and underlying structure of the 
hospitality industry. 
5109.  HOSPITALITY INTERNSHIP  
12-MONTH HOSPITALITY INTERNSHIP PLACEMENT 
Practical experience in the Hospitality industry. 
program.
5306. FOUNDATIONS OF BUSINESS DISCIPLINES
This course provides provisionally admitted MBA students with the foundations in two 
key business disciplines, financial accounting and marketing, required to be successful in 
the MBA program. It is intended for provisionally admitted MBA students who have not 
earned undergraduate degrees in business or business-related disciplines. The course can 
also apply to students who are admitted under provisional status with GPAs less than 3.0. 
The MBA selection panel may wave all or portions of the content requirement depending 
on the student’s transcripts, background and experience. 
MBA program under provisional status.
5307.  FOUNDATIONS OF BUSINESS ETHICS  
AND SCHOLARLY WRITING
This course provides provisionally admitted MBA students with the foundation in business 
ethics and scholarly writing in the APA style format designed to be successful in the MBA 
program. It is intended for provisionally admitted MBA students who do not have earned 
undergraduate degrees in business or business-related disciplines. The course can also 
apply to students who are admitted under provisional status with GPAs less than 3.0. The 
MBA selection panel may wave all or portions of the content requirement depending 
on the student’s transcripts, background and experience. 
MBA program under Provisional status.
5324. BUSINESS INTEGRITY
This course examines business ethics from both an organizational and managerial 
perspective. Specifically, students focus on the application and evaluation of scholarly 
articles and cases in order to better understand that different individuals view the same set 
of facts through different ethical lenses or perspectives. An assessment tool is employed 
in the course and designed to help students understand what core values influence 
their choices when no rule tells them exactly what to do. 
M.B.A. program.
5332. BUSINESS LAW FOR MANAGERS
An introduction to the study of law as it relates to the field of business from a managerial 
perspective. The MBA student will progress through the topics of the legal system and 
the environment of business organizations, classification of business entities, contracts 
(focusing on the concepts of offer, acceptance, consideration, consent, capacity to contract, 
illegality, and the requirements of a written agreement), the Uniform Commercial Code 
(particularly as it relates to sales and secured financing), real property (including landlord 
and tenant issues), personal property (including insurance, bailments, and leases), agency, 
employment law, debtor-creditor relations, bankruptcy, alternative dispute resolution 
(overview of the court systems, negotiation, mediation and arbitration), and a study of 
the legal aspects and implications of ethical conduct and leadership integrity in business. 

5401. HOSPITALITY ENTREPRENEURSHIP
This is a Business design competition, where a new business plan is developed for a 
new or existing business, the proposed idea will be presented before a board of current 
hospitality leaders for determination of the quality of research, outcome viability and 
overall mastery of business plan. 
completion of 20 hours of credits from the program.
5402. 12-MONTH HOSPITALITY INTERNSHIP PLACEMENT
Practical experience in the Hospitality industry. 
program.
1101. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I LAB
This course is the laboratory study of chemistry designed to provide students with 
basic knowledge and laboratory skills used in chemistry. Prerequisite(s): Concurrent 
registration in CHEM 1301, or credit for CHEM 1301, or consent of instructor.
1102. GENERAL CHEMISTRY II LAB
This course is the laboratory study of chemistry designed to provide students with 
basic knowledge and laboratory skills used in chemistry. Prerequisite(s): Concurrent 
registration in CHEM 1302, or credit for CHEM 1302, or consent of instructor.
1103. INTRODUCTORY CHEMISTRY LAB

1301. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I
This course is designed for students preparing for careers in science, engineering, and 
medical fields. Atomic theory, stoichiometry, bonding, periodic classification, states of 
matter, and problem solving are emphasized. Prerequisite(s): 2 years of high school 
algebra, MATH 1310 or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1310.
1302. GENERAL CHEMISTRY II
This is a continuation of CHEM 1301. Subjects included are: solutions, colloids, 
thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, chemical equilibrium, electrochemistry, descriptive 
inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry and nuclear chemistry. 
of CHEM 1301 or equivalent with a grade of “C” or better.
1303. INTRODUCTORY CHEMISTRY
This is a basic chemistry course for non-science majors. Emphasis is on allied health 
topics. 
or consent of instructor. Concurrent enrollment in lab CHEM 1103.
2111. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I LAB

2112. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II LAB

2311. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I
This is designed for students preparing for careers in chemistry, biology, chemical 
engineering, medicine, dentistry, and pharmacy. Main topics are bonding, classification, 
theory of mechanism, aliphatics, aromatics, and stereochemistry. 
in lab CHEM 2111.
2312. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II
A continuation of CHEM 2311, topics include nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared 
spectroscopy, halides, organometallics, alcohols, phenols, ethers, aldehydes, ketones, 
carboxylic acids and derivatives, amines, carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. 
in lab CHEM 2112.
2350. WRITING AND RESEARCH – CHEMISTRY FOCUS
This course examines the standards and styles for various kinds of writing about chemistry 
and bio-chemistry. The basic elements of chemical and biochemical research, its planning 
and reporting are included. Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1301 or 1303.
3101. QUANTITATIVE METHODS LAB

3102. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS LAB

3103. THERMODYNAMICS LAB

3104. QUANTUM MECHANICS LAB

3105. BIOCHEMISTRY I LAB

3106. BIOCHEMISTRY II LAB

3107. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY LAB

3270. TOPICS IN CHEMISTRY
This is an intensive study of a specific topic in chemistry. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
3301. QUANTITATIVE METHODS
This course is a study of wet chemistry methods to determine the amount of chemical 
species in a sample. Gravimetric and volumetric analysis is combined with statistical data 
to determine the sample identity and quantity. As equilibrium is of utmost importance to 
the understanding of volumetric analysis, it is pursued vigorously. 
1302/1102 with a “C” or better. Concurrent enrollment in lab CHEM 3101.
3302. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS
This course is a study of instrumental methods to determine the amount of chemical 
species in a sample. Electronics are the basis of instrumentation and are used to 
understand the flux of information from sample to end-user. Gas Chromatography, Liquid 
Chromatography, Mass Spectrometry, Spectroscopy techniques (UV, IR, Absorption, 
and Emission) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance are surveyed at both the atomic and 
molecular level. 
enrollment in lab CHEM 3102.
3303. THERMODYNAMICS
This course is a study of thermodynamic properties of gasses, liquids, and solids with 
emphasis on chemical energy production and usage. 
a “C” or better. Concurrent enrollment in CHEM 3103.
3304. QUANTUM MECHANICS
This course is a study of quantum mechanics and the implications it has on chemistry. 
Wave functions, quantum numbers, electronic structure of atoms, and bonding theory 
are presented and incorporated into spectroscopic determination of both atomic and 
molecular species. 
Concurrent enrollment in lab CHEM 3104.
3305. BIOCHEMISTRY I
This is the study of the state of the structure and function of biologically significant 
molecules; enzymology, metabolism, biosynthesis of macromolecules, bioenergetics, 
molecular biology. 
Concurrent enrollment in lab CHEM 3105.
3306. BIOCHEMISTRY II
This is a continuation of CHEM 3305, the study of protein, carbohydrate, and fat 
metabolism and their interrelationship. 
of “C” or better. (3-3)
3307. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY
This is the study of the basic concepts and theories of inorganic chemistry and how these 
are used to predict and understand the physical and chemical properties of compounds of 
the elements other than carbon. Inorganic compounds in the air, water, earth, and in the 
laboratory will be studied. 
of “C” or better. Concurrent enrollment in lab CHEM 3107.
3350. INTRODUCTION TO CHEMICAL RESEARCH-R
Student research is allied with the instructor’s research. The student, in consultation with 
the instructor, will select a research problem, review the pertinent literature, collect and 
analyze data, and compose a paper. Graded “S/U.” 
3370. TOPICS IN CHEMISTRY
This is an intensive study of a specific topic in chemistry. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
4195.  READINGS IN POPULAR LITERATURE  
IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES
This is a study of a specific popular book about natural science. Author will be invited 
for a seminar. Offered as circumstances permit. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4398. INTERNSHIP IN CHEMISTRY-R
This is supervised field study or employment which provides the opportunity for the 
student to apply prior learning to practical laboratory situations. 135 hours are required, 
90 hours of which need to be in the practical internship. 
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN CHEMISTRY-R
This course is designed to introduce the student to current literature, laboratory techniques, 
and writing skills in chemistry. 
CHINESE (CHIN)
1401. ELEMENTARY CHINESE I
This is an introductory course which focuses upon basic reading, writing, listening and 
speaking of Mandarin Chinese. Significant aspects of Chinese cultures are also addressed. 
This course is the first in a sequence of introductory Chinese courses.
1402. ELEMENTARY CHINESE II
This course, a continuation of CHIN 1401, expands language proficiency skills in reading, 
writing, listening and speaking Mandarin Chinese. It also emphasizes communicative 
language proficiency with survival topics. 
2303. INTERMEDIATE CHINESE I
This course helps students to become more proficient in reading, writing, listening and 
speaking Mandarin Chinese while gaining a deeper understanding of the Chinese culture. 
Course conducted mainly in Chinese.
2304. INTERMEDIATE CHINESE II
This course provides a wider variety of topics presented in Chinese to enhance overall 
language proficiency. Course conducted primarily in Chinese. 
1101.  COMMUNICATION PRACTICUM:  
SPORT AND SOCIAL MEDIA
This is an experiential course in which students interested in the role of social media in 
sport will take part in practical tasks and assignments related to this topic. During this 
course, students will design a campaign using social media tools to promote, market, or 
engage fans for a sporting event or team. Students will create content for a variety of 
social media platforms.
2101. COMMUNICATION PRACTICUM: SPORT INTERVIEWING
This is an experiential course in which students interested in interviewing and sport. 
Students will take part in practical tasks and assignments related to this topic. During 
this course, students will conduct interviews with athletes, coaches, administration, or 
other individuals associated with teams or events. Interview will result in video, written, 
or spoken content.
2301. PUBLIC SPEAKING
Oral communication and presentation skills are consistently identified by employers 
as top skills they look for in college graduates. This introductory course provides an 
overview of effective communication and presentation skills and examines the key 
components of communication in personal and professional settings, across various 
professional and personal contexts. Students will develop skills in researching current 
topics, identifying credible sources to explain their ideas and reasoning, organizing ideas, 
recognizing reasoning fallacies to develop sound arguments, and practices to reduce 
anxiety about public speaking.
2320. INTRODUCTION TO COMMUNICATION
This course introduces students to the fundamental principles of communication and how 
they impact our everyday lives. Students will be introduced to communication concepts 
as they apply to forming and maintaining interpersonal and romantic relationships, 
managing conflict at work and at home, communicating nonverbally and verbally, 
communicating with families and in other small groups, and using communication 
in sport settings and interactions. Additionally, students will learn how messages can 
persuade and motivate others to change their actions, values, or behaviors and about how 
mass media communication shape our society while also being shaped by society.
2322. SMALL GROUP COMMUNICATION
This course will focus on the theories of small group communication as well as the 
application skills in a small group context. Emphasis will be placed on formation and 
participation in group projects, as well as leadership, decision making, and problem 
solving in small groups. The range of topic areas in this course will make it an excellent 
elective for many other academic majors on campus, including Business, Psychology, 
Chemistry, and Biology. 
3120. COMMUNICATION PRACTICUM: EVENT PLANNING
This is an experiential course for students who are interested in event planning. Students 
will gain skills executing a variety of types of events, from promotion to hosting small 
and/or large events – most which are set to take place at Schreiner University. Students 
will develop organization and communication skills needed in this field and will complete 
an after-event reflection. Course may be repeated for credit.
3128. COMMUNICATION PRACTICUM: RADIO BROADCASTING
This is an experiential course for students who are interested in communication-related 
opportunities in radio. Students will take part in practical tasks and assignments associated 
with the radio industry. These may include producing programs and content, participate 
and deliver live sessions, and/or building relations with radio audiences through social 
media and sales. Course may be repeated for credit. Prerequisite (if any): None.
3310. INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION
This course will address the theories and application of interpersonal and relational 
communication. Students in this course will be introduced to the key concepts of 
interpersonal and relational communication including self-esteem, identity, assertiveness, 
active listening, relational development and maintenance, and issues of conflict in power 
in relationships. Students will use theories and concepts to understand relationships at 
home, school, and in the workplace and will learn strategies for constructing healthy 
relationships. 
3320. CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION
This course will explore the ways in which culture manifests in social relations and 
interactions. We will specifically examine how culture, derived from gender, religion, 
and/or ethnic groups, shapes our experiences, identities, and practices. The goal of this 
course is therefore to build inter-cultural competencies through discussions of the role of 
culture in (re)defining difference and discourse in everyday life. 
standing or instructor consent.
3323. COMMUNICATION AND NEW MEDIA
This course will focus on the ways in which various aspects of communication are 
continually influenced and redefined by information and digital technologies. As our 
personal and professional environments become increasingly mediated, and our lives 
become increasingly dependent on media access and usage, it is important to gain an 
awareness and understanding of how these processes impact human development and 
interaction. This is why class discussions will center on what is “new” in new media 
and the challenges as well as affordances of emerging communication technologies. 

3324. MASS COMMUNICATION
This course examines the origins and developments of print, electronic, and digital 
media, and how they influence and are influenced by our society. Students will take a 
closer look at the structural factors (e.g. linguistic, political, social, economic) that shape 
media industries such as television and film, video games, social media, magazines, and 
news, as well as the content that drives audiences to consume them. By understanding 
how individuals and social groups interact with media products, and the ethics and issues 
in these relationships, students are able to become conscious media consumers.
3325. SOCIAL MEDIA: STRATEGIES AND APPLICATIONS
Social media platforms have become essential tools for communicating and building 
relationships. More and more, organizations are using them to find and connect with 
publics, audiences, and consumers. This course will teach students to develop professional 
digital skills and see social media uses beyond personal needs by learning about best 
practices, applying communication theories through hands-on projects, and completing 
online certifications. Students will take supplementary coursework and certification 
exams through Hootsuite (Social Media Platform). Prerequisites (if any): Sophomore 
standing or permission of instructor.
3326. THE DARK SIDE OF INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION
This course will explore the dark side of communication in relationships. The “dark side” 
refers to the aspects of communication that are dysfunctional and destructive. These 
behaviors include deviance, betrayal, infidelity, exploitation, manipulation, deception, 
oversharing, and objectification. Most communication courses focus on the best and most 
effective ways of communicating and this course acknowledges that we also encounter 
destructive and ineffective communication in our everyday lives. Students can’t have a 
complete picture of communication without considering both sides. Students will learn 
about these behaviors in face-to-face and online interactions as well as in personal and 
professional contexts. Students will explore the effects of these behaviors on relationships 
and strategies for dealing with them. Additionally, students will explore seemingly 
“bright side” communication behaviors that have negative consequences and “dark side” 
behaviors that have positive consequences. Prerequisites (if any): Sophomore standing 
or permission of instructor.
3327. VIDEO REPORTING
Students will learn how to gather and process information in a comprehensive, critical, 
and ethical manner by producing news stories and documentaries. In so doing, students 
will gain media literacy and production skills about information-rich media such 
as documentary filmmaking and journalism. Emphasis will be given to non-fiction 
storytelling techniques like interviewing, visual evidence, and modes of representing 
social reality onscreen. 
3340. NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
This course explores nonverbal communication of relational messages like affection, hate 
and power in the regulation of social interaction. The study includes traditional topics 
of chronemics, haptics, kinesics, proxemics, territoriality, paralanguage and issues of 
coding and decoding. 
3350. PERSUASION
This course will focus on a variety of social-scientific and humanistic approaches to 
persuasion at the interpersonal, group, and mass communication levels. In addition to 
examining the psychological and logical processes underlying the creation and reception 
of persuasive messages, we will cover the impact of cultural myths and premises, new 
media technologies, and social movements. The topics and content will make it a useful 
option to non-communication majors as well (e.g., Business, Marketing, Advertising, 
Humanities, and Psychology). 
3351.  QUALITATIVE METHODS  
IN COMMUNICATION RESEARCH-R
Students will become familiar with various interpretive research in studying 
communication. Students will learn how to develop and organize a literature review, 
formulate research questions, and become familiar with various qualitative research 
strategies such as interviewing, focus groups, and ethnography. Students will carry out 
a communication research project employing one of the main approaches in qualitative 
research methods. 
3360. SPORT COMMUNICATION
This course will give students an overview of the field of sport communication. The 
course will cover the intersection of sport, media and technology, and communication. 
During the course, students will learn about topics such as fandom, media and sport, 
and the politics of sport. Also, the course will cover issues of identity as they relate 
to sport through gender, race, and ethnicity. The course will examine the interpersonal 
and organizational aspects of sport communication, including coaching and crisis 
communication, and the effects of technology, such as fantasy sports and social media, 
on sport.
3380. DIRECTED STUDY IN COMMUNICATION
This course explores discipline topics not previously offered in current Communication 
Studies classes or to substitute required classes that fall outside their scheduled rotation. 
This course must be approved by a supervising instructor and the registrar and may be 
repeated when topics vary. 
4310. COMMUNICATION AND CONFLICT – R
This course examines theoretical perspectives for managing communication conflict and 
practical application of conflict theory and research. 
consent of the instructor.
4328. NARRATIVE VIDEO PRODUCTION
This course examines the principles, terms, and concepts of narrative video production 
from a fiction standpoint. Students will go through the production process, from writing 
a script to screening their work. Emphasis will be placed on the relationship between 
storytelling and cinematic style, or how images and audio come together to communicate 
a message. Editing and shooting projects will make use of digital tools and platforms. 
Ideally, students should come with basic knowledge of photography and some foundation 
in communication. 
(photography) or ART 2330 (digital photography), or consent of instructor.
4340. THEORIES IN COMMUNICATION
This course covers foundational and contemporary theories that explain communication 
as a social and cultural process. Students will be exposed to a breadth of communication 
theories, both grand and narrow in scope, that offer a framework to explain and study 
face-to-face interactions, media engagement, as well as the role of symbols and culture in 
shaping communication practices. Therefore, as students understand how theories shape 
how we make judgments and decisions about reality, they are too becoming practitioners 
of communication. 
4350. HEALTH COMMUNICATION
This course is designed to investigate and explore the communication processes, ethics, 
theory, and research on health communication. This course will familiarize students with 
health communication in a variety of contexts including, patient-centered interactions, 
social support surrounding health issues, health campaigns, and risk and crisis 
communication. Students will consider various delivery methods of health communication 
including technology, media, and e-Health. By the end of this course students should be 
able to apply theory to different levels of health communication including interpersonal, 
organizational, and public health campaigns to identify strategies for constructing positive 
health-related communication. 
4370. TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION
This course will focus on various topics in the field of Communication Studies. 
Possible topics include: Political Communication, Organizational Communication, 
Health Communication, Interpersonal Communication, Critical Media Discourse and 
the Public Sphere, Mass Media and Society, Religion and the Media, Environmental 
Communication, etc. Topics will vary, and the course may be repeated when topics vary. 

4397. SENIOR SEMINAR IN COMMUNICATION
This is a capstone experience for communication studies majors to assess their 
understanding of communication practices and processes, contexts in which 
communication occurs, the theory of communication as well as the research and criticism 
that surround and embody the field. The student is challenged to exhibit significant 
knowledge and understanding from all previous communication studies coursework. 

end of the current or subsequent semester.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN COMMUNICATION STUDIES
This capstone option offers students supervised field employment in an organized 
setting, with an emphasis on applying communication skills in a real-world environment. 

1301.  INTRODUCTION TO COMMUNICATION SCIENCES  
AND DISORDERS
Study of speech, hearing and language development and its disorders, delays or 
differences, descriptions of communicative disorders for the clinician, health professional 
and classroom teacher. 
3301. LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT
Study of normal acquisition and development of speech and language. Basic information 
from linguistics, psychology and communication in children are introduced and correlated 
to developmental stages. 
Program.
3302. PHONETICS
An introduction to English phonetics; analysis of normal and abnormal phonological 
processes in children and adults; includes training in the use of the international Phonetic 
Alphabet, and practice in the transcription of normal and disordered speech. 
Admission to the Communication Disorders Program.
3303. AUDIOLOGY
Study of the anatomy and physiology of the auditory system; relation of acoustics 
to normal and pathological auditory function; administration and analysis of basic 
audiological tests. 
3304.  ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY  
FOR SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
Study of the structure and function of the speech production system with emphasis on 
physical problems in speech, language, and hearing. 
Communication Disorders Program.
3305. LANGUAGE DISORDERS AND INTERVENTIONS
Survey of the etiologies, diagnoses, treatments and prognoses of language disorders. 

completion (C or better) of Language Development.
3306.  ARTICULATIONS AND PHONOLOGICAL DISORDER  
AND INTERVENTION
Survey of the etiologies, diagnoses, and management of articulation and phonological 
disorders; includes discussion of therapeutic models. 
the Communication Disorders Program and successful completion (C or better) of 
Phonetics course.
3307. AURAL HABILITATION
Principles and procedures in the habilitation and rehabilitation in children and adults; 
includes study of educational audiology and assistive listening devices. 
Admission into the Communication Disorders Program and successful completion (C or 
better) of Audiology course.
4301. NEURAL BASES OF COMMUNICATION
Study of neuroscience and its application to aspects of normal and disordered 
communication. 
and successful completion (C or better) of Anatomy and Physiology for Speech and 
Language course.
4302. COMMUNICATION DISORDERS IN CHILDREN
Assessment and intervention of language, articulation and phonological disorders in 
preschool children. 
and successful completion (C or better) in Language Development course, Phonetics 
course and Audiology course.
4303. DIAGNOSTICS
Overview of general procedures in diagnosis in communication disorders. 
Admission to the Communication Disorders Program and successful completion (C or 
better) of Language Development course, Phonetics course and Audiology course.
4304. SPEECH AND HEARING SCIENCE
Study of the physical properties of sound, sound measurement, basic auditory function, 
acoustic and physiological phonetics and the perception of speech. 
Admission to the Communication Disorders Program and successful completion (C or 
better) of Audiology course.
4305.  CLINICAL METHODS FOR SPEECH LANGUAGE  
AND HEARING
Survey of the clinical methods in speech-language pathology, including target behaviors, 
treatment methods and controlling and maintaining target behaviors. 
Admission into the Communication Disorders Program and successful completion 
(C or better) of Articulation and Phonological Disorders and intervention course and 
Communication Disorders in Children course.
4306.  CLINICAL PRACTICUM FOR SPEECH LANGUAGE  
AND HEARING
Administration of speech/language therapy and diagnostic evaluation under direct 
supervision. 
successful completion (C or better) of Articulation and Phonological Disorders and 
Intervention course and Communication Disorders in Children course.
1460. HARDWARE AND SYSTEM SOFTWARE
This course offers principles and applications of computer hardware, software, networks 
and their theoretical underpinnings, installation, and configuration through lecture and 
operational laboratory experiences.
2370. TOPICS IN COMPUTER INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
This is a study of a computer-related topic or topics. May be repeated when topics vary.
2410. INTRODUCTION TO PROGRAMMING LOGIC
This course covers basic program development and problem solving, pseudo-code 
development, program development and application, introduction to object-oriented 
programming, and hands-on development of computer programs. Course has an 
associated lab experience.
3340. INTRODUCTION TO OPERATING SYSTEMS
This course examines the role of computer operating systems in the overall vulnerability 
of the network. A comparison of the more popular operating systems will be used to 
illustrate the concepts to the class.
3350. CYBERSECURITY AND NETWORKING TRACKS
The CompTIA A+ Core Series requires candidates to pass two exams: Core 1 (220-
1001) and Core 2 (2001002) covering the following new content: Demonstrate baseline 
security skills for IT support professionals; configure device operating systems, including 
Windows, Mac, Linux, Chrome OS, Android and iOS and administer client-based as well 
as cloud-based (SaaS) software; troubleshoot and problem solve core service and support 
challenges while applying best practices for documentation, change management, and 
scripting; support basic IT infrastructure and networking; configure and support PC, 
mobile and IOT device hardware; implement basic data backup and recovery methods 
and apply data storage and management best practices. 
of instructor.
3401. NETWORKING AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
This course introduces students to all forms of electronic communication in organizations 
today. Course topics include data communications hardware and media, protocols 
and standards, local area and wide area networking, wireless networking, network 
management, telecommunications software and application design. Students have the 
option to take the Network+ certification exam at the end of the course for which an 
examination fee is required. Course has an associated lab experience.
3403. DATABASE MANAGEMENT
This is an overview of database design, development, maintenance and management, 
including information and organizational theory, determining database requirements, 
relational and object-oriented data models and implementation and user interfaces. 
Hands-on experience with database design, construction and maintenance using SQL and 
other DBMS tools will be used. Course has an associated lab experience.
3405. INFORMATION ASSURANCE AND SECURITY
This course introduces students to information assurance and security and includes 
fundamental aspects, security mechanisms, operational issues, policy, attacks, 
security domains, forensics, information states, security services, threat analysis, and 
vulnerabilities. Students have the option to take the Security+ certification exam at the 
end of the course for which an examination fee is required. Course has an associated 
lab experience.
4361. SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
This course provides an understanding of the information system development and 
modification process, including evaluation of system development methodologies, 
understanding effective communication and integration with users and user systems, 
developing interpersonal skills with clients, users and team members and the adherence 
to systems development life cycle standards. Students will gain hands-on experience with 
object-oriented analysis and design and data modeling tools. 
3403, and CIT 3405.
4362. COMPTIA A PLUS CERTIFICATION
CompTIA Network+ helps develop a career in IT infrastructure covering troubleshooting, 
configuring, and managing networks. Network+ ensures an IT professional has the 
knowledge and skills to: Design and implement functional networks; configure, manage, 
and maintain essential network devices; use devices such as switches and routers to 
segment network traffic and create resilient networks; identify benefits and drawbacks of 
existing network configurations; implement network security, standards, and protocols; 
troubleshoot network problems; and support the creation of virtualized networks. 

4363. COMPTIA SECURITY PLUS CERTIFICATION
CompTIA Security+ is the first security certification IT professionals should earn. 
It establishes the core knowledge required of any cybersecurity role and provides 
a springboard to intermediate-level cybersecurity jobs. Security+ incorporates best 
practices in hands-on troubleshooting to ensure security professionals have practical 
security problem-solving skills. Cybersecurity professionals with Security+ know how to 
address security incidents – not just identify them. 
4370. TOPICS IN COMPUTER INFO TECHNOLOGY
This is a study of selected topics in the field of computer information technology. Topics 
will vary, course may be repeated when topics vary.
4380.  DIRECTED STUDY IN COMPUTER  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Students enrolling in this course should have Junior 
or Senior status, a minimum of a 2.0 GPA. May be repeated with a change in topic.
4396. INTERNSHIP IN CYBER SECURITY
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student to 
apply learning to practical job experience. 
upper level CIT courses.
4397. INTERNSHIP IN PROGRAMMING
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student to 
apply learning to practical job experience. 
upper level CIT courses.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student to 
apply learning to practical job experience. 
upper level IS courses.
4420. ALGORITHMS AND DATA STRUCTURES
This course analyzes the performance of algorithms and discusses programming 
techniques and data structures used in the writing of effective algorithms. The course 
also explores abstract data structures, recursion, sorting, searching, implementation of 
data structures using explicit memory management, and an introduction to abstract data 
type design and encapsulation. Course has an associated lab experience.
4421. STRUCTURED PROGRAMMING
This course explores C as structured programming language. Students will learn how 
C helps programmers concentrate on problem-solving while using C as a high-level 
independent language. Students will discover why C is commonly used by software 
developers whose applications have to run on many different hardware platforms. Course 
has an associated lab experience.
4422. VISUAL BASIC
In this introductory programming concepts course, students will gain an understanding 
of logic. How control, and object-oriented structures as well as hands-on experience 
in developing interfaces, objects, and controls using a variety of design approaches. 
Visual Basic introduces and applies concepts of object-oriented, event-driven, structured 
programming to create end-user mobile, web, office, and database applications. Course 
has an associated lab experience.
4423. ADVANCED JAVA PROGRAMMING
This course is an advanced study of Java programming language used for writing 
complex and sophisticated stand-alone applications and Internet applets that have visual 
objectives. Course has an associated lab experience.
4424. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
This course offers different aspects of software engineering with the concentration on 
processes, methods, and tools for developing reliable software-centered systems. The 
course is a study of software development process models, project management, a variety 
of modeling notations, requirements analysis, architectural design methods, and testing 
techniques. Course has an associated lab experience.
4430. NETWORK ADMINISTRATION
This course teaches skills to implement, administer, and troubleshoot information systems 
that incorporate servers in a networked computing environment and the Active Directory 
on a Windows Server. Course has an associated lab experience.
4431. ADVANCED NETWORKING
An introduction to Cisco basic router configuration for local area networks and wide 
area networks. Topics include initial router configuration for TCP/IP, IP addressing 
techniques, management of the router configuration, backup of router configuration files, 
and intermediate routing protocols. Course has an associated lab experience.
4432. TCP/IP
This course provides in-depth coverage of the TCP/IP network protocol and also covers 
distributed network applications, both on local area (LAN) and wide-area (WAN) 
networks. Course has an associated lab experience.
4433. NETWORK SECURITY
This course takes an indepth look at network security concepts and techniques. Students 
will examine theoretical concepts that make the world of security unique. The course 
provides a practical, hands-on approach when examining networking security techniques. 
Students will explore different network strategies and the advancement of network 
implementation, including program solving strategies. Course has an associated lab 
experience.
4434. OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING
This is a study of object-oriented programming (OOP), including concepts of objects, 
classes, encapsulation, collections, abstract data types, extensions, constructors, 
information hiding, inheritance, polymorphism and programming concepts of pointers, 
vectors, arrays and data structures. Students will gain an understanding of computer 
algorithms and their construction and how they are used to solve problems. Students will 
experience hands-on development of computer programs. 
4435. LINUX SERVERS
This course is an advanced study of the Linux operating system. Includes advanced 
concepts of system management and communication, the installation and maintenance 
of software, network security, and data integrity issues. Course has an associated lab 
experience.
4440. COMPUTER FORENSICS
This course provides a multidisciplinary overview of digital forensics and high technology 
crime involving computers. Students will gain an understanding of what digital evidence 
often exists in support of criminal and civil investigations, as well as sensitive business 
matters, such as employment disputes financial fraud, intellectual property theft, and 
other matters affecting business managers. This course examines evidence preservation, 
as well as the legal and ethical issues surrounding the collection and analysis of digital 
evidence. Course has an associated lab experience.
4441. OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
The objective of this course is to provide an in-depth study of security issues – including 
vulnerabilities, threats, exploits and defense mechanisms in operating systems. Topics 
covered include: Jogging, auditing, address space randomization, memory protection, 
virtual machine introspection (VMI), malware and malware immunization. The course 
emphasizes real world vulnerabilities, threats, exploits and defense. The course engages 
students with state of the art operating system security and exposes them to current 
problems in operating systems security. Course has an associated lab experience.
4443.INTRUSION DETECTION
This course explores computer information systems security monitoring, intrusion 
detection and crisis management. Course includes alarm management, signature 
configuration, sensor configuration, and troubleshooting components. Course emphasizes 
identifying, resolving, and documenting network crisis and activating the response team. 
Course has an associated lab experience.
4444. INCIDENT RESPONSE AND HANDLING
This course presents an indepth coverage of incident response and incident handling, 
including identifying sources of attacks and security breaches; analyzing security logs; 
recovering the system to normal; performing postmortem analysis; and implementing 
and modifying security measures. Course has an associated lab experience.
4451. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT SERVICES
This course prepares the student for the role of Support Specialist whose role is to keep 
the customer productive by focusing on the business needs of the customer, establishing 
credibility and trust, and by handling the most difficult customer scenarios. Emphasis 
is given to problem solving and troubleshooting, team dynamics, and interpersonal 
communication skills. Specifically, this course prepares students for help desk and 
desktop technician certification examinations. Certifications accelerate support technician 
careers by providing a structured framework for learning skills and distinguish job 
candidates from their peers. Students will also complete a 25-hour experiential residency. 
Examination fees are required. The major field exam in Business is required in this 
course. Course has an associated lab experience. 
5331. MANAGING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
This course explores the strategic applications of information systems from an 
organizational perspective. The successful student will understand the foundations, 
strategies, organization, and implementation of information systems projects that serve 
the organization. Topics include emerging information systems trends; rethinking 
business processes; assessing the costs and benefits; cultural, structural and political 
aspects; managing and implementing single projects, and administering program projects. 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE (CRIJ)
Schreiner University offers a Bachelor of Arts in Criminal Justice. The program will 
prepare students, with knowledge in policing, the courts, corrections systems and the 
juvenile justice system.
The major consists of CRIJ 1301, 2301, 2303, 2306, COMM 3310 or 3320, BIOL 1301, 
1217, PHIL 1310, plus 33 upper level hours including: CRIJ 3301, 3302, 3303, 3307, 
4398, ENGL 3363, POLS 3330 or 3376, PSYC 3341, RELI 4340 and 6 hours upper 
level CRIJ. 
The minor in Criminal Justice requires CRIJ 1301, 2306 and 12 upper level hours from: 
CRIJ 3302, 3307, 3370, 4301, 4305, 4306, or 4307.
1301. INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
An introductory course designed to familiarize students with the facets of the criminal 
justice system, including the processing of offenders, punishment and its alternatives, and 
the future of the criminal justice system. 
2301. CRIMINOLOGY 
A course designed to familiarize students with the scientific field of criminology. The 
course covers the nature and extent of criminal behavior; past and present theories for 
crime and delinquency; and the evaluation of prevention, control, and treatment programs. 
2303. CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS AND PRACTICE 
A course in criminal law which includes the definition of law, definition of crime, general 
principles of criminal responsibility, elements of major crimes, punishments, conditions 
or circumstances which may excuse from criminal responsibility, the court system, and 
the basic concepts of criminal law with an emphasis on the penal law of the State of Texas. 
2306. HUMANITIES AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
This course examines the relationship between concepts typically covered in Humanities 
courses, and how they inform and intersect with the concepts and practice of Criminal 
Justice.
3301.  RESEARCHING METHODOLOGY IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
An introduction to the scientific approach to understanding the social world, the relation 
between theory and research, research design, and data collection. This course is designed 
to help students gain an understanding of the research process involved in examining 
criminal justice issues. 
3302.  FORENSIC SCIENCE AND CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION 
This course provides a brief overview of the science behind crime detection and a detailed 
discussion of techniques used for case management and documentation, the concept of 
proof, the impact of emergent technology on the investigative process, interacting with 
victims and witnesses, and interviewing suspects. 
consent of instructor.
3303. HISTORY OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
An exploration of the major social, economic, legal and political events that have 
contributed to the formation of the criminal justice system in the United States. Emphasis 
is on the common roots of the different components of the present system. 
CRIJ 1301.
3304. CRIME AND GENDER
An investigation of the definitions of gender, gender roles, and  how gender impacts 
offending, victimization, and criminal justice processing. The influence of gender 
on working in the criminal justice system as professionals is evaluated. In addition, 
criminological theories are evaluated in light of gender and the relationship between 
gender and the criminal justice system. Prerequisites. CRIJ 1301 and 2301.
3307. THE JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM 
The nature and extent of delinquency, explanatory models and theories for delinquent 
behavior, the juvenile justice system, juvenile court practices and procedures, and the 
role of the police officer and correctional officer when dealing with juvenile youths 
are covered.
3370. TOPICS IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
This is a selected topics course in the discipline of criminal justice. May be repeated with 
change of subject. May involve travel.
4301. CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND SOCIAL DIVERSITY 
An examination of how social diversity and inequality shape the way criminal behavior 
is defined and controlled through the application of the criminal law and criminal 
justice system. Attention is given to the disparity of criminal offending, victimization, 
and criminal justice processing across demographic groups as well as explanations for 
observed disparities. Prerequisites Junior or Senior standing.
4305. THE MEDIA AND CRIME
A survey of the connections between the mass media, crime, and criminal justice; explore 
how the criminal justice system, criminals, and crime are portrayed in film, TV drama, 
and news media; and examine how the media reflect our collective perceptions of crime, 
violence, and victimization as well as shape attitudes toward crime. Prerequisites Junior 
or Senior standing.
4306. SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Students engage in the description, classification, and analysis of the causes and correlates 
of substance use problems. Prerequisites Junior or Senior standing.
4307. CYBERCRIME 
A seminar in which students focus on topics related to cybercrime, including legal, 
enforcement, behavioral, and social factors that influence its perpetration, prevention, 
and prosecution. Prerequisites Junior or Senior standing.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
This course offers students supervised field employment in an organized setting, with an 
emphasis on applying criminal justice skills in a real-world environment. 
Senior status or consent of instructor.
ECONOMICS (ECON)
2301. (2301) PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS I
This is an introduction to the study of macroeconomic problems of a capitalist economy. 
Included are the theory and measurement of changes in the levels of prices, employment, 
national income and other aggregates. Topics include monetary and fiscal policy, 
stabilization policy, economic growth and international economics.
2302. (2302) PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS II
This is an introduction to the microeconomic theory of consumer behavior and of the firm 
and resource allocation in a private enterprise economy. The study includes analysis of 
pricing of output, determination of wages, interest and profits under alternative market 
structures, contemporary issues such as taxation, pollution, unions and government 
regulation. 
EDUCATION (EDUC)
2303. FOUNDATIONS IN EDUCATION
This course provides an opportunity to explore a career in education and the various 
aspects of the teaching profession. Students will examine their commitment to teaching, 
the purpose of education, the public school classroom, and the relationship of various 
curriculum areas. Students will become familiar with the state competencies for Texas 
teacher certification and the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills. Formal application 
process into the Teacher Education Program will be conducted. The course requires 5 
hours observation in actual classroom settings. Course includes training in the Code 
of Ethics and social media ethics and other TEA required trainings for professional 
educators. Course is recommended for sophomore level students and is required for all 
teacher certification candidates. 
2335. LEARNING IN AND THROUGH THE ARTS
This course presents the arts integration theories across curriculum with a special 
emphasis on integration with STEM topics. Students will explore how the arts enhance 
learning in all fields and will also prepare pre-service teachers through an interactive 
workshop format to apply knowledge of theatre, music, and visual and communicative 
arts content and curriculum based upon the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 
(TEKS) for the purpose of planning and implementing effective and developmentally 
appropriate instruction in the arts and core content. Students will learn how to use the arts 
to develop critical and creative thinking skills which transfer across curriculum. Open 
to non-education students as aesthetic experience and understanding of the visual and 
performing arts.
2336. INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC EDUCATION
As an introduction to the field of music education, students will examine the development 
of music education from its inception to its present status through lecture, observation, 
reading, and class discussion. Students will learn how the music educator uses effective 
communication and partnership with families and other members of the educational 
community to both enhance student performance and expand professional knowledge 
and skills. Students will become aware of ethical and legal responsibilities, curriculum 
trends, TEKS standards in music, and the opportunities and challenges facing today’s 
music educator. 
2633.  EARLY CHILDHOOD RESEARCH BASED  
INSTRUCTION – FBE
This actively engaged field-based experience course is designed to provide information 
related to nutrition, health, and safety of young children in an educational setting. 
Research and methodology for creating a safe and motivating learning environment 
will be emphasized. The NAEYC standards will be used for program evaluation 
research and reflection. Training includes the Science of Reading, EC-3 Standards and 
TEKS. Response to Intervention (RTI), the role of the family and community in child 
development, and the theories of child development as they apply to best practices in the 
EC learning environment and needs of the young child. Students will be able to apply 
knowledge and skills from this course to plan instruction and ongoing assessment which 
meets the developmental needs of Early Childhood students including ESL and ELL 
students based on English Language Proficiencies (ELP). Early Childhood Intervention 
Services (ECIS) will be included as a resource for planning intervention. Students will 
use the TEA Prekindergarten Guidelines in planning and preparing effective instruction, 
and the Early Childhood Data System (ECDS) will be reviewed as a tool for informing 
stakeholders of the effectiveness of an EC program. This course is an on-site Service-
Learning Project held in conjunction with a local school district. Course is intended for 
partial fulfillment for those seeking certification in EC-6. 
3301. SOCIAL STUDIES-HISTORY EDUCATION (K-12)
This course is designed for teacher education students in Multidisciplinary Studies and 
for History majors adding Secondary Education Certification. Students will be trained 
in research based pedagogy and will develop lesson plans and learning experiences 
based on the requirements of the Texas public school curriculum and standards (TEKS) 
including cross curricular applications and the use of disciplinary literacy. Students will 
become familiar with using technology in the classroom to enhance learning for all 
students, planning experiences and designing assessments, taking into consideration the 
diversity of the classroom. Students will prepare for the TExES content exam in history. 

Program or Secondary Education Minor or consent of the instructor.
3302.  MATHEMATICS PEDAGOGY:  
CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION
This course is a requirement for all core subjects EC-6 and 4-8 certifications and for 4-8 
math and math/science certifications. This course addresses the pedagogy of mathematics 
for Texas public schools. Instruction includes lesson plan preparation using the Texas 
Essential Knowledge and Skills and the TAC 19 technology standards. Students will 
learn research-based strategies for effective pedagogy in Mathematics and concepts will 
be reviewed in preparation for the TExES Core Subjects state exam. Course will include 
5-10 hours of case study experience in the field working with K-8 students. 
MATH 1310, Jr. standing, admission into Teacher Education Program or permission of 
the instructor.
3303.  MATHEMATIC PEDAGOGY:  
ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION
This course is a requirement for all Core Subjects EC-6 and 4-8 certifications and for 4-8 
Math and Math/Science certifications. This course addresses the pedagogy of mathematics 
for Texas public schools. Instruction includes T-TESS lesson plan preparation using the 
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills and the TAC 19 technology standards. Students 
will learn research-based strategies for effective pedagogy in Mathematics and concepts 
will be reviewed in preparation for the TExES Core Subjects state exam. Course will 
include 5-10 hours of case study experience in the field working with K-8 students. 
Teacher candidates will work with community 408 school students in an academy 
learning environment to apply research-based math pedagogy strategies for intervention 
in math knowledge and skills. Course will include 10 hours of case study experience in 
the field working with 4-8 students. 
into Teacher Education Program.
3341. PHYSICAL EDUCATION PEDAGOGY
This course will prepare pre-service teachers seeking certification in All-Level Exercise 
Science/ Physical Education to apply knowledge of physical education, health, and 
fitness content based on the Texas Education Association (TEA) requirements for all 
students in grades K-12 through research of state and national models combined with 
methods application and demonstration. Planning and implementing effective and 
developmentally appropriate instruction in physical education, health, and fitness based 
on knowledge of Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) will be emphasized 
along with research on the effects of physical fitness on learning. Students will learn how 
to incorporate standards for health and fitness to promote healthful living from school age 
to adulthood. This course is also open to all EC-6 certification students for the purpose of 
training for the TExES Core Subjects exam. 
to the Teacher or consent of the instructor.
3350. SCIENCE FOR TEACHERS SURVEY OF CONTENT
Science for Teachers is a survey of content and test preparation course required for all 
students seeking certification in EC-6 and 4-8 Core Subjects and 4-8 Math/Science. This 
course will prepare students to be successful on the TExES state exam science subtest of 
the Core exam and will include a review of the science concepts and processes for the 
following science testing competencies: history and nature of science, impact of science, 
physical science, life science, and earth and space science. Students will also review the 
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) as they apply to all EC-8 science courses.
4301.  SCIENCE EDUCATION METHODS AND PEDAGOGY (EC-12) 
This course is designed for teacher education students in Multidisciplinary Studies and 
for science majors adding Secondary Education Certification. Students will be trained 
in research-based pedagogy for sciences and will develop lesson plans and learning 
experiences based on the requirements of the Texas public school curriculum and 
standards (TEKS) including cross curricular applications and the use of disciplinary 
literacy. This course is designed for the senior level as part of the preparation for the 
required curriculum unit prior to clinical teaching. 
including BIOL 1301, EDUC 3350, Junior standing and admission to the Teacher 
Education Program or Secondary Minor in Education or consent of the Education 
Department. Prerequisites (if any): 6 hours science, EDUC 3350, admission to TE, or 
permission of the department.
4305. CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT
This field-based course will prepare teacher candidates to design standards aligned 
curriculum and assessment for student learning. A major focus is to ensure student 
proficiency in planning effective and engaging lessons and appropriate formative and 
summative assessment techniques. Content is closely tied to state public school laws, 
codes, organization, and curriculum requirements. The course also addresses instructional 
materials, resources, and evaluation of student performance. Additionally, it addresses 
the needs of diverse and special populations and standards including English as a Second 
Language (ESL), English Language Learners (ELL), and English Language Proficiencies 
(ELP). This course serves to confirm the student has adequate knowledge and skills to 
establish a classroom climate that fosters learning, equity, and excellence in an organized 
and productive classroom. This course requires ten 15 hours engaged field experience at 
a local campus. 
Program. Concurrent enrollment with RDNG 4309.
4320. CLINICAL TEACHING SEMINAR
The Clerical Teaching Seminar is a week of TEA required trainings and a series of 10 
seminars for students completing their fourteen-week clinical teaching internship. The 
seminars are designed for certification levels EC-6, 4-8, all level, and 7-12. Students 
will be provided TEA required certification trainings including STAAR testing, T-TESS, 
Mental Health First Aid, Trauma Informed Pedagogy and the McKinny-Vento Law, 
School Law for the first year teachers, work force opportunities and hiring, and Dyslexia 
policy and procedures to better prepare clinical teachers for the legal, ethical, and 
professional responsibilities of first year educators. 
Teaching or permission of the director, 30 hours of engaged field experience, pass all 
applicable TExES state content exams.
4325. CLINICAL TEACHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
This course will guide and coach clinical teachers through the development and submission 
of the final assessment of readiness to teach for the purpose of meeting state certification 
requirements. The assessment measures teacher knowledge of subject matter, knowledge 
of student learning needs, research on how students learn, and analysis of student work to 
improve instruction. The three tasks which must be completed and submitted to a national 
grading collective of educators include: 1. Planning for instruction and assessment, 2. 
Instructing and engaging students in learning, 3. Assessment of student learning. Clinical 
Teachers will complete this course and assessment during the 14-week clinical teaching 
assignment on school campuses. (Course must be taken concurrently with EDUC 4621, 
4622, 4623, or 4624. 
4320 Clinical Seminar taken concurrently or prior semester).
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN EDUCATION
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Students must have upper-level status, a 2.75 GPA, 
and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change of topic. All 
assignments for student teaching or internships are made through the teacher education 
office. Under no circumstances is the student to arrange his or her own assignment with 
a particular teacher or school. Student teachers will be assigned to school districts in 
the Hill Country Center for Professional Development of Teachers Collaborative. It 
is generally the policy of the Schreiner University Teacher Education Program not to 
supervise student teachers or interns at locations more than 100 miles from Kerrville. 

The Schreiner University Teacher Education program will assign a university 
supervisor for interns in schools within 100 miles of Kerrville. For those 
who wish to complete their internship outside this area, a university field 
supervisor may be secured within that area at the cost to the intern.
4604. INTERNSHIP I: TEACHER CERTIFICATION
This is designed for a student admitted to a teacher certification program under a post-
baccalaureate plan and approved for an internship will focus on specified educational 
topic. Must register for EDUC 4604 during Fall term of the school year in which the 
internship is to be completed.
4605. INTERNSHIP II: TEACHER CERTIFICATION
This is designed for a student admitted to a teacher certification program under a post-
baccalaureate plan and approved for an internship will focus on specified educational 
topic. Must register for EDUC 4605 during Spring term of the school year in which the 
internship is to be completed.
4621. CLINICAL TEACHING (EC-6)
Clinical Teaching is a field-based internship in partnership with the Schreiner University 
EPP, accredited public or private schools and the Texas Education Agency (TEA). 
Clinical Teaching is the competency and standards-based capstone experience of the 
Teacher Certification Program, which consists of a fourteen (14) week induction into the 
teaching profession during which time the student teacher assumes a major responsibility 
for teaching and learning in the classroom under the supervision of an assigned mentor 
teacher and university field supervisor. Clinical teachers are observed a minimum of three 
(3) times by a university supervisor. These observations will include a written report, a 
pre- and post-lesson conference, and discussions with the mentor teacher as needed. This 
course requires co-enrollment in the Clinical Teaching Seminar. 
into Clinical Teaching, 30 hours of observations and engaged field experience, pass the 
TExES state content exam.
4622. CLINICAL TEACHING (4-8)
Clinical Teaching is a field-based internship in partnership with the Schreiner University 
EPP, accredited public or private schools and the Texas Education Agency (TEA). 
Clinical Teaching is the competency and standards-based capstone experience of the 
Teacher Certification Program, which consists of a fourteen (14) week induction into the 
teaching profession during which time the clinical teacher assumes a major responsibility 
for teaching and learning in the classroom under the supervision of an assigned mentor 
teacher and university field supervisor. Clinical teachers are observed a minimum of three 
(3) times by a university supervisor. These observations will include a written report, a 
pre- and post-lesson conference, and discussions with the mentor teacher as needed. This 
course requires co-enrollment in the Clinical Teaching Seminar. 
into Clinical Teaching, 30 hours of observations and engaged field experience, pass the 
TExES state content exam.
4623. CLINICAL TEACHING (7-12)
Clinical Teaching is a field-based internship in partnership with the Schreiner University 
EPP, accredited public or private schools and the Texas Education Agency (TEA). 
Clinical Teaching is the competency and standards-based capstone experience of the 
Teacher Certification Program, which consists of a fourteen (14) week induction into the 
teaching profession during which time the clinical teacher assumes a major responsibility 
for teaching and learning the classroom under the supervision of an assigned mentor 
teacher and university field supervisor. Clinical teachers are observed a minimum of three 
(3) times by a university supervisor. These observations will include a written report, a 
pre- and post-lesson conference, and discussions with the mentor teacher as needed. This 
course requires co-enrollment in the Clinical Teaching Seminar. 
into Clinical Teaching, 30 hours of observations and engaged field experience, pass the 
TExES content exam.
4624. CLINICAL TEACHING (ALL-LEVEL)
Clinical Teaching is a field-based internship in partnership with the Schreiner University 
EPP, accredited public or private schools and the Texas Education Agency (TEA). 
Clinical Teaching is the competency and standards-based capstone experience of the 
Teacher Certification Program, which consists of a fourteen (14) week induction into the 
teaching profession during which time the clinical teacher assumes a major responsibility 
for teaching and learning in the classroom under the supervision of an assigned mentor 
teacher and university field supervisor. Clinical teachers are observed a minimum of three 
(3) times by a university supervisor. These observations will include a written report, a 
pre- and post-lesson conference, and discussions with the mentor teacher as needed. This 
course requires co-enrollment in the Clinical Teaching Seminar. 
into Clinical Teaching, 30 hours of observations and engaged field experience, pass the 
TExES state content exam.
5301. DIVERSITY AND EQUITY IN LEARNING
This course explores educational research and best practices for achieving diversity and 
equity in the learning environment based on knowledge of cultural differences. SES 
background, characteristics and data on special populations, and learning exceptionalities 
for students in the modern school setting. Differentiated techniques, processes, and 
inclusive programs designed to meet the unique learning needs of diverse learners in the 
general education classroom are reviewed through case study, experience, and current 
school law requirements. Students participate in individual and group research for the 
purpose of exploring the impact of culture and equity issues on learning, motivation, and 
classroom environment.
5303. CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION
This course traces the history of education through the lens of evolving trends in 
curriculum design and instructional focus. Current research in curriculum and instruction 
will be reviewed, which will include an analysis of best practices and the role that 
curriculum plays in the work of the professional educator. Students will research past and 
present curriculum theories and the impact on instruction. The course also emphasizes 
methods of organizing and managing a student centered classroom to enhance and 
motivate student learning. Ten (10) classroom hours of observation are required for 
certification students only.
5304. EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
Basic concepts of action research, strategies of experimental, historical, and descriptive 
research are introduced. Participants will use these concepts to read, interpret, and 
evaluate educational research. Students collaborate to design, plan, and defend an action 
research proposal in a classroom setting.
5305. PEDAGOGY AND PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES
This course discusses the professional roles and responsibilities of the Master teacher 
in the 21st Century and examines the legal and ethical requirements of the profession. 
This course is the capstone of the Graduate Teacher Certification Program and prepares 
candidates seeking certification to take the PPR K-12 state test. For the experienced 
teacher, PPR is explored from a teacher leader or administrator’s point of view including 
projects such as designing faculty professional development and evaluating pedagogical 
skills and educational professionalism.
5307. INTERNSHIP I: GRADUATE TEACHER CERTIFICATION
This is the first of two courses in which students will complete a one year internship on a 
probationary certificate. (Students must secure a position with a school district.) Graduate 
Faculty will provide a mentoring component including four (4) formal evaluations-two 
each semester. Interns will be expected to attend learning team meetings once a month 
throughout the internship which will include methods and management topics, relevant 
educational research, and contemporary classroom issues. 
the Master of Education plus Certification Program.
5308. INTERNSHIP II: GRADUATE TEACHER CERTIFICATION
This is the second of two courses in which students will complete a one year internship 
on a probationary certificate. (Students must secure a position with a school district.) 
Graduate Faculty will provide a mentoring component including four (4) formal 
evaluations-two each semester. Interns will be expected to attend learning team meetings 
once a month throughout the internship which will include methods and management 
topics, relevant educational research, and contemporary classroom issues. 
5312. SCHOOL/COMMUNITY RELATIONS COLLABORATION
This is a study of the strategies and design models for school, faculty, family and 
community collaboration. Students collaborate on a survey study of school/community 
relations resulting in a diagnosis of school culture and the design of a school action plan 
for improving school, family, and community relations.
5313.  RESEARCH-BASED INSTRUCTION –  
SUPERVISION OF LEARNING
This course will emphasize data driven research-based strategies for increasing student 
achievement, models of successful instruction to help teachers/administrators plan, and 
techniques for implementation of school effectiveness programs. Students will examine 
and research the means available for measuring and diagnosing individual learning needs 
and styles, selecting alternative learning materials for diverse and disadvantaged student 
populations, and creating learning environments that promote student success, teacher 
collaboration. Students will take on the role of instructional supervisor to analyze case 
studies and explore possibilities for effective instruction in a variety of scenarios. Ten 
(10) classroom hours of observation are required for certification students only.
5321. TRENDS AND ISSUES IN EDUCATION
This course will examine the trends and issues in education affecting public school 
operations and management. The focus will be on the forces and factors that influence 
the teaching/learning environment and the processes and procedures for implementing 
positive change through teacher or administrative leadership. Emphasis will be on 
researching and assessing current educational practices and developing strategies for 
improvement.
5323. LEARNING THEORY – CHILD DEVELOPMENT
This is a study of the incidence, prevalence, etiology, and characteristics of the student 
learning styles and intelligences and the relationship to child development. Learning 
theory will be explored as a catalyst for educational change. Students will explore child 
development stages, transitions, and impact on learning related to their teaching field 
and level.
5324.  ASSESSMENT FOR DIVERSE LEARNING  
AND INFORMED TEACHING
This course is designed to develop knowledge and skills in the selection, administration, 
and interpretation of instruments and procedures to evaluate diverse students. Emphasis 
will be on research based assessment strategies for enhancing effective instruction and 
learning across the curriculum. Students will demonstrate the use of various forms of 
classroom assessment through presentation and classroom application including learner 
and teacher directed assessment, formative and summative assessment, performance 
assessment, and content specific assessment.
5325. DIRECTED FIELD PROJECT
This is an organized course offering the opportunity for specialized study not normally or 
not often available as part of the regular course offerings. Directed Field Project courses 
may be repeated for credit when the topics vary, but not more than 6 hours will apply to 
the master’s degree.
5326.  INSTRUCTIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND DIGITAL 
LITERACY OF INSTRUCTIONAL LEADERS
This course will review the latest developments in instructional technology design and 
employ a variety of multimedia technology tools to design, create and evaluate engaging 
learning experiences. Responsibilities will include using technology to develop teaching 
methods and assessments. The course also includes the study of Digital Literacy as the 
ability to use information and communication technologies to find, evaluate, create, and 
communicate information. The International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) 
Standards will be studied and applied to inform lesson planning and curriculum planning.
5340.  THE SCIENCE OF READING  
FOR EDUCATIONAL LEADERS
This course provides an introductory study of assessment and instructional techniques 
for the science of teaching reading. The goal of this course is to provide instructional 
leaders who will be required to oversee the science of teaching reading programs in the 
school setting with an opportunity to acquire professional development competencies 
for evaluating, planning, and organizing reading instruction for students with reading 
difficulties. The course progresses through the process of corrective reading, beginning 
with the initial recognition of struggling readers to the prescriptive stage of applying 
research-based strategies for each component of reading, and concluding with the design 
of a school wide program for the improvement of reading proficiency.
5341. DISCIPLINARY LITERACY RESEARCH-R
In this course students will become proficient in the art and science of using disciplinary 
literacy to effectively learn in a variety of content areas. Students will review current 
research on disciplinary literacy, explore materials and methods, and create a toolkit 
of reading strategies to assist learners with reading proficiency across the curriculum. 
Students will develop a research study and present research in a conference format.
5601. INTERNSHIP: GRADUATE CLINICAL TEACHING
This course is a six hour required classroom field experience designed for students 
admitted into Teacher Education through the Master of Education Plus Teacher 
Certification Program. Students will fulfill this requirement through 14 weeks of full 
time clinical teaching or 24 weeks of part-time clinical teaching in a state accredited 
school under the supervision of a mentor and university field supervisor. Candidates 
are required to successfully complete a program provided on site computer based or 
paper based practice exam and pass the TExES state content exam before they will be 
admitted into the Teacher Certification Program or the Clinical Teaching Internship. 
NOTE: If a distance candidate is unable to come to campus for the practice exam, the 
candidate will be responsible for the purchase of a program approved on-line practice 
exam. 
classroom observations.
6301. SCHOOL LAW
This course explores the role and responsibility of the school as a educational institution 
for students, parents, taxpayers and employees. Students will explore the legal framework 
and implications of constitutional, case and statute laws affecting public schools. 
Emphasis will be placed on required documentation and responsibility of teachers and 
school administrators pertaining to student rights, code of ethics, special education rights 
and legal issues, and the allocation of resources to protect such rights.
6302. EDUCATION THEORY AND LEADERSHIP
This course is an introduction to the roles and tasks of positions in educational leadership. 
Topics studied include leadership responsibilities, effective communication, time 
management, motivation techniques, problem solving, delegating, and the effective use 
of professional development and other current theories and issues which increase the 
performance of administrative and instructional leadership and benefit the school.
6303.  PUBLIC SCHOOL POLICY  
AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
This course prepares the principal candidates to take on the responsibility of initial 
administrative duties including traditional assistant principal duties and educator 
evaluation procedures for the API. Topics also include hiring procedures and staffing 
projections, ethics policy, school budget planning and state/federal funding including 
resources of revenue for schools. Candidates will also explore designing and implementing 
professional development to increase staff motivation and involvement and create a 
culturally responsive school climate for all educators and students.
6304.  THE PRINCIPAL AS INSTRUCTIONAL  
LEADER PRACTICUM
The Principal as Instructional Leader Practicum (3 semester hours) (160 clock hours) 
requires that the candidate secure a state accredited campus. Principal Site Supervisor. 
A University Field Supervisor will guide the principal candidate and mentor through 
competency-based practicum activities and requirements. The Practicum is designed to 
prepare the candidate for first year principal responsibilities and duties as an administrator 
and instructional leader. Coursework will include professional development, an 
analysis of school culture and climate, and relevant projects aligned with TEA required 
principal competencies. Practicum will include professional development and relevant 
research, analysis, and collaboration projects aligned with TEA required principal 
competencies. Candidates will be formally evaluated a minimum of three times by the 
University Field Supervisor and Site Supervisor. 
Certification Program.
6305. INSTRUCTIONAL LEADERSHIP
This course is designed to develop instructional leadership knowledge and skills and 
promote the success of all students by building a positive school culture, providing an 
effective curriculum and standards aligned instructional program, and training faculty to 
use academic outcomes to measure the quality of instruction and develop a school vision 
to enhance learning. 
6306.  THE PRINCIPALSHIP AND ADMINISTRATIVE  
INTERNSHIP PRACTICUM II
The Principalship course plus Administrative Practicum (up to 80 clock hours) requires 
that the candidate continue to secure a state accredited campus and principal mentor. 
A University Field Supervisor will guide the principal candidate and mentor through 
competency based practicum activities and requirements. The practicum will require 
relevant projects aligned with TEA required Principal competencies. The benchmark 
for completing Practicum II will be the successful completion of a practice Principal 
Certification Exam (if not successfully completed in Practicum I) and passing the TExES 
Principal Certification Objective Exam and all standards aligned internship activities as 
approved by the Site Supervisor. Candidates will be formally observed and evaluated a 
minimum of three times over the period of Practicum I and II. 
and concurrent enrollment in 6310.
6310.  PRINCIPAL AS INSTRUCTIONAL LEADER TEST  
AND PASL PREPARATION
The Principal Test Preparation Course is a required course for the principal certification 
program and provides additional tutoring in testing skills and a standards aligned review 
of TExES state exam 268 and the PASL. Candidates must be concurrently enrolled in 
EDUC 6304. The Principal Practicum and emphasis on Task 1: Problem Solving in the 
Field. Candidates will demonstrate the ability to address and resolve significant problems 
or challenges in the school that influences instructional practice and student learning 
through an analysis of test questions.
6312.  EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP FOR SCHOOL 
EFFECTIVENESS AND LEARNING PERFORMANCE
This course includes the study of major administration theories and the impact of 
management and leadership on school effectiveness and performance. Participants will 
identify the elements of an effective school and explore models of school improvement, 
how to use instructional rounds, and data driven instruction using data to evaluate student 
learning results and school improvement initiatives and develop a school improvement 
plan which leads to a positive school culture for diverse populations.
ENGINEERING (ENGR)
1111. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING I
This course will introduce students to Engineering Design through team problem solving 
in design competitions, with results presented in technical reports and oral presentations. 
Students will also analyze Engineering Ethics and Professional Practice case studies 
related to their design projects. 
1112. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING II
This course will introduce students to Engineering Design through team problem solving 
in design competitions, with results presented in technical reports and oral presentations. 
Students will also analyze Engineering Economics problems related to their design 
projects. 
1113. ENGINEERING GRAPHICS I
This course introduces students to 2D drafting. Students will complete orthographic 
and isometric hand sketches, and use modern software for computer aided design. 

1114. ENGINEERING GRAPHICS II
This course introduces students to digital 3D modeling. Students will use modern software 
and hardware to electronically model machine components, create digital construction 
models, and 3D print prototypes. 
2310. ENGINEERING STATICS 
This course will feature a vector approach to the principles of statics. The course will 
also include concepts of free body diagrams, distributed loads, properties of areas, second 
moments, and the laws of friction. Students will also be able to use applications of the 
theory to simple trusses, frames, and machines as well as produce shear and moment 
diagrams. 
2320. ENGINEERING DYNAMICS 
Basic principles of classical vector mechanics applied to the kinematics and kinetics 
of particles, systems of particles, and rigid bodies. The student will solve engineering 
problems using freebody diagrams, equations of motion, force and acceleration, work 
and energy, and momentum techniques. 
ENGR 2310.
2330. MECHANICS OF MATERIALS 
This course covers simple stress and strain in deformable bodies, mechanical properties 
of materials, axial load, torsion, shear and bending moment, flexure and shear stresses in 
beams, combined stresses, stress transformation, pressure vessels, statically indeterminate 
members and columns. 
2331. SURVEYING 
This course covers horizontal, vertical, and angular measurements analytically and using 
modern equipment in the field Other topics include GPS, GIS, topographic and boundary 
maps, and leveling. 
2340. ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS
This course covers fundamental circuit components (resistors, capacitors, inductors, 
op amps); DC circuit analysis (parallel and series, Kirchhoff’s Laws, Mesh and Node 
analysis, Thevenin and Norton equivalent circuits); linear circuit transient and sinusoidal 
steady state response; motors and generators. Analytical solutions, lab experiments, and 
computer simulations are all performed. Prerequisites (if any): Math 2422. 
3310. ENGINEERING THERMODYNAMICS 
This course covers fundamental energy relationships applied to both closed and 
open systems, determination of thermodynamic properties, first and second laws of 
thermodynamic processes, and basic cycles. These engineering principles are also 
contextualized within notable engineering disasters for ethical analysis. 
PHYS 2325, MATH 2423, or consent of instructor. 
3320. FLUID MECHANICS 
This course covers fluid properties; fluid statics and dynamics; transport theory and 
transport analogies, conservation of mass, energy, and momentum; dimensional analysis; 
boundary layer concepts; pipe flows; compressible flow; and open channel flow. 

consent. 
3321. ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING 
This course covers environmental quality, water quality modeling, water & wastewater 
treatment systems, sludge processing, solid wastes, hazardous wastes, environmental 
law, and air pollution control. Since the applications of this field are rapidly evolving, 
students will also practice learning strategies to aid their future continuing education. 

3322. MATERIALS ENGINEERING 
This course explores the microscopic and macroscopic properties, structure, and 
performance of materials used in engineering applications including metals, concrete, 
asphalt, wood, ceramics, and composites. Prerequisites (if any): CHEM 1301, ENGR 
2330. 
3330. STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 
This course covers reactions, shear and bending moment, plane and space trusses, 
influence lines, deflections, virtual work, energy methods, approximate analysis, 
consistent deformations method, slope deflection and moment distribution methods, 
introduction to matrix methods. Analytical and computer solution techniques will both 
be covered. Prerequisites (if any): ENGR 2330 Mechanics of Materials.
3340. DESIGN OF MACHINERY 
This course covers analytical study of motions, velocities, accelerations, and forces for 
design of machine elements. Spatial mechanisms, robotics, and actuator selection are also 
introduced. Prerequisites (if any): ENGR 2320 Engineering Dynamics.
4101. GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING LABORATORY 
This laboratory covers exploration, sampling, and measurement of soil for classification 
and determination of physical properties needed for geotechnical engineering design. 
Prerequisites (if any): Corequisite: Geotechnical Engineering. 
4102. ROBOTICS LABORATORY 
This hands-on course covers the principles of operating robotic systems. Topics include 
optimization, motion planning, task planning, Kalman and particle filters, kinematics, 
and control algorithms. Projects require programming simulated and physical robots 
and manipulators. Prerequisites (if any): Prerequisite CIT 2410. Corequisite: Dynamic 
Systems and Control. 
4170. TOPICS IN ENGINEERING 
This is an intensive study of a specific engineering topic. May be repeated when topics 
vary. Prerequisites (if any): Will vary for each topic. 
4193. ENGINEERING RESEARCH PROJECT 
This is an independent investigation culminating in a written paper and/or conference 
poster or presentation. Work may be analytical, simulated, experimental, or a combination. 
May be repeated twice; total 3 credit hours. Prerequisites (if any): Consent of Instructor. 
4194. SENIOR PROJECT IN ENGINEERING 
This course is part of a culminating yearlong capstone design sequence. Additionally, 
this course will reinforce project management topics related to ideation, learning, and 
scheduling. Prerequisites (if any): 
Control or Environmental Engineering or Transportation Engineering. Prerequisite or 
Corequisite: Fluid Mechanics and Materials Engineering.
4195. SENIOR PROJECT IN ENGINEERING II 
This course is part of a culminating yearlong capstone design sequence. Additionally, this 
course will reinforce prototyping, testing, and economics. Prerequisites (if any): Senior 
Project in Engineering I.
4196. SENIOR PROJECT IN ENGINEERING III
This course is part of a culminating yearlong capstone design sequence. Additionally, 
this course will reinforce engineering ethics. Prerequisites (if any): Senior Project in 
Engineering I. 
4197. SENIOR PROJECT IN ENGINEERING IV 
This course is part of a culminating yearlong capstone design sequence. Additionally, 
this course will reinforce written and oral technical and professional communication. 
Prerequisites (if any): Senior Project in Engineering III.
4198. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING 
This course involves learning engineering in a work setting. The nature of the work 
performed, and time commitment required, will vary for each sponsoring company. May 
be repeated twice; total 3 credit hours. Prerequisites (if any): Junior Standing. 
4321. GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING 
This course introduces the field of soil mechanics. Topics include soil classification, 
compaction, effective stress, shear strength, seepage, and settlement. Applications 
including foundations, retaining structures, and slope stability will serve as basis for 
ethical analysis of notable geotechnical engineering disasters. Prerequisites (if any): 

4322. TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING 
This course covers planning, design, operation, and maintenance of transportation 
systems. Topics include highway geometric design, pavement design, and drainage; 
capacity and level of service analysis; signalized intersections; principles of traffic 
flow; and automated vehicle technologies. This course will also cover different styles 
of communication to and from government agencies, private industry, and the general 
public related to existing and proposed transportation systems. Prerequisites (if any): 
junior standing or instructor consent.
4323. CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
This course introduces the roles and responsibilities of and interactions between owners, 
engineers, contractors, and suppliers for construction projects. Students will be exposed 
to contracts, documents, and other project management topics throughout the project 
life cycle including project specifications, Request for Proposals, estimating, bidding 
strategies, scheduling, budgeting, risk management, insurance, and ethical principles. 
Prerequisites (if any): junior standing or instructor consent. 
4340. HEAT TRANSFER 
This course covers convection, conduction, radiation, dimensional analysis and design of 
heat transfer equipment. This course will also cover different styles of communication to 
and from government agencies, private industry, and the general public related to energy 
use. 
4341. DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL 
This course covers theory, analysis, and design of linear control systems. Topics 
include system modeling in state space and transfer function form, time and frequency 
domain analysis, stability, PID feedback control, and linear quadratic regulators. Since 
the applications of this field are rapidly evolving, students will also practice learning 
strategies to aid their future continuing education. Prerequisites (if any): MATH 3425, 
ENGR 2320.
4370. TOPICS IN ENGINEERING 
This is an intensive study of a specific engineering topic. May be repeated when topics 
vary. Prerequisites (if any): Prerequisites will vary for each topic.
ENGLISH (ENGL).
1301. (1301) RHETORIC AND COMPOSITION
A course designed to prepare students for academic writing, this course focuses on 
mechanics of expression and principles of English usage, refinement of writing techniques, 
critical writing skills, responses to written materials, and development of a clear, forceful 
prose style. Students completing this course should be able to present writing in response 
to a specific reading and demonstrate proficiency in reading and thinking critically.
1302. (1302) LITERATURE AND COMPOSITION
Providing an introduction to literature with units on the short story, drama, and poetry, 
this course emphasizes discussion and writing about great works of literature. Students 
will learn both to recognize and to apply literary techniques to thematic concerns, 
explicating short works as they organize and develop essays in MLA format. 
2306. INTRODUCTION TO CREATIVE WRITING
Introduction to the principles and techniques of creative writing, aimed at developing the 
creative process. Includes lectures, reading, and writing exercises in poetry, fiction, and 
creative nonfiction. 
2310. INTRODUCTION TO JOURNALISM
An introduction to journalistic writing, this course addresses differences between 
journalism and composition, with particular emphasis on journalistic tasks: writing the 
lead and a balanced news story; conducting an interview; testing for libel; and preparing 
layout and design of broadsheet and tabloid pages. Students construct a writing portfolio 
and publish in the student newspaper. 
2340.  (2332) WORLD LITERATURE  
THROUGH THE RENAISSANCE
A survey of the masterpieces of world literature from the ancient world through the 
Renaissance, this course emphasizes historical, generic, and thematic connections. 

2341. (2333) WORLD LITERATURE FROM THE RENAISSANCE
A survey of the masterpieces of world literature from the Age of Reason to the present, 
this course emphasizes historical, generic, and thematic connections. 
1302.
2350. INTRODUCTION TO FILM
This course will introduce students to the history of narrative film from an international 
perspective, the technical components of filmmaking, and the function of film as both an 
art form and a communication medium. 
2360. LITERARY CRITICISM
This course addresses theories of literary critique, with emphasis on scholarly research and 
writing, the application of secondary sources, MLA documentation and the cultivation of 
a scholarly writing voice. In addition to writing a series of brief response papers, students 
will write a 6-8 page critical paper that applies a particular critical theory to a primary 
literary text. 
2370. TOPICS IN ENGLISH
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in English, including the possibility of a 
travel component. The course may be repeated when topics vary. 
1301.
3303. TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION
This course focuses on technical writing and communicating in the workplace with 
emphasis on analyzing audience and purpose, organizing information, designing graphic 
aids, and collaborative and individual practice in oral presentations and interview. 
Students will write specialized forms such as: abstracts, instructions, proposals, memos, 
letters, and resumes. 
3307. ADVANCED COMPOSITION
A capstone composition course emphasizing exposition and argument, this course 
emphasizes personal and analytical essays, with specific address to audience, purpose, 
and prose style. Encouraged to practice writing strategies appropriate to their chosen 
disciplines, students explore contemporary essays and discussions of composition and 
revision. This course fulfills the advanced English composition distribution requirement, 
but does not fulfill an advanced English requirement. 
COMM 2301.
3315. LITERATURE AND MEDICINE
This course will introduce the field of Literature and Medicine and will examine literary 
representations of medical care, including portrayals of clinicians, depictions of illness/
disability, and the narrative ethics surrounding patient-as-subject.
3316. CREATIVE WRITING WORKSHOP
The study and practice of techniques of writing poetry, fiction, drama and creative 
non-fiction, this course will offer the serious creative writer an opportunity to refine 
their creative process through writing exercises, focus on one genre, close editing, and 
workshop discussion. 
3321. STUDIES IN EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE
This survey of American literature through the nineteenth century emphasizes competing 
discourses related to historical, social, intellectual, and aesthetic movements. 
ENGL 2360 or concurrent enrollment in ENGL 2360 or consent of instructor.
3330. STUDIES IN EARLY BRITISH LITERATURE
This survey of British literature through the nineteenth century emphasizes representative 
authors whose works are related to historical, social, intellectual, and aesthetic 
movements. 
consent of instructor.
3334. STUDIES IN SHAKESPEARE
This is the study of the dramatic tragedies, comedies and histories of one of the single 
greatest writers of all times, William Shakespeare.
3351. THE ART OF EDITING
This course will introduce students to the art and methods of editing style, editing for 
clarity and meaning, and editing for publication. 
standing, or consent of instructor.
3360. STUDIES IN POETRY
A study of poetry, this course will use close examination of specific literary periods 
or individual authors to develop an inclusive understanding and appreciation of poetic 
forms, conventions and themes. 
course, or consent of instructor.
3361. STUDIES IN PROSE
A study of prose, this course will use close examination of specific literary periods or 
individual authors to develop an inclusive understanding and appreciation of prose forms, 
conventions, and themes. 
consent of instructor.
3363.  CRIME, PUNISHMENT, AND JUSTICE IN LITERATURE
This course explores literary texts about crime, punishment, and justice from diverse 
periods and places in order to explore how questions of right, wrong, and fairness have 
been and are understood in various cultures and historical periods. Students will read 
literary texts that question the psychological and social causes of crime, philosophies 
of law, the varieties and purposes of punishment, and what justice might mean in 
different contexts.
3365. PERIODS AND GENRES
This course includes readings from and critical approaches to particularly literary periods 
and genres. Course topics may be broadly periodical (e.g. Medieval Literature), genre 
oriented (e.g. War Poetry), or focused on an individual author (e.g. W. B. Yeats). This 
course is designed to accommodate a travel component. 
2000-level English course, or consent of instructor.
3370. TOPICS IN ENGLISH
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in English, including the possibility of a 
travel component. The course may be repeated when topics vary. 
1302 and a 2000-level English course, consent of instructor.
3371. MYTHOLOGY
This course examines world mythology, with an emphasis on Greek, Roman, Scandinavian, 
Hebrew, and Native American stories. Since myths symbolize human experience and 
embody the spiritual values of a culture, they are studied using various interpretations, 
including historical, sociological, and psychological perspectives. 
1302 and junior standing.
3372.  TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN  
AND BRITISH LITERATURE
This survey course of twentieth-century American and British literature emphasizes 
representative authors whose works are connected to historical events, emphasizing 
social, intellectual, and aesthetic movements, including but not limited to Modernism, 
Post-modernism, and Post-colonialism. 
enrollment in ENGL 2360 or consent of instructor.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN ENGLISH
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and appropriate dean. Enrolling students must have upper-level status and at 
least a 2.0 GPA. This course may be repeated when topics vary. 
1302, and either 2340 or 2341 and junior standing.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN ENGLISH
The senior project is a capstone, independent study course, contracted with one or more 
faculty members. The student will contract to take part in an internship, a service project, 
a research investigation, or a creative writing project, culminating in a senior thesis, 
portfolio or comparable senior artifact. 
faculty advisor for the project.
EXERCISE SCIENCE (EXSI) and SPORT MANAGEMENT (SPMG)
1102.  SPORT MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM:  
EVENT MANAGEMENT
This is an experiential course in which the entry-level sport management major takes part 
in practical athletic event management tasks and engages in focused reflection through 
academic work to construct the knowledge, skills and values needed by professionals 
in the sport management industry. The assigned athletic event management tasks are 
predominantly completed on-campus. May be repeated.
1103.  SPORT MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM:  
FACILITIES OPERATION
This is an experiential course in which the entry-level sport management major takes part 
in practical facility operation management tasks and engages in focused reflection through 
academic work to construct the knowledge, skills and values needed by professionals in 
the sport management industry. The assigned facility operation management tasks are 
predominantly completed on-campus. May be repeated.
1201. (1338) INDIVIDUALIZED FITNESS
This course is designed to give students the knowledge necessary to develop an effective 
individualized fitness program. Also emphasized is the development and assessment of 
the four health-related physical fitness components: cardiovascular endurance, muscular 
strength and endurance, muscular flexibility, and body composition. Nutritional 
considerations, cardiovascular disease and cancer are also discussed.
1301. INTRODUCTION TO EXERCISE SCIENCE AND SPORT
This course introduces the student to the field of Exercise Science, including physical 
education and sport. This overview emphasizes historical trends in Exercise Science as 
they relate to the evolution of the major subdisciplines of the field.
1305. FITNESS AND WELLNESS
Fitness and Wellness is a three (3) hour information-oriented course that will provide 
scenarios, examples and recommendations for students that will include, but not be 
limited to: health, fitness, stress management, reproductive choices, chronic disease, 
environmental health and wellness that can be used for a lifetime and their future career. 
In general, this course is designed to give students the knowledge necessary to develop 
an effective individualized fitness program with an emphasis on the development 
and assessment of the five health-related physical fitness components: cardiovascular 
endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility, and body composition. 
Nutritional considerations, cardiovascular disease and cancer are also discussed.
2103. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: YOGA
Introduction to Yoga is designed to present the various physical and holistic applications 
of hatha (traditional) yoga. This will provide students with an opportunity to increase 
their muscular flexibility and core strength via pranayama, asanas and mental focus 
through relaxation / meditative techniques. Students must know and demonstrate a basic 
understanding of 20 asanas, the major types of yoga and the basic historical traditions 
and background of yoga. Course may be repeated. Appropriate for all students at all 
class levels.
2104. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: VOLLEYBALL
This course is designed to present the activity of volleyball, so that the students become 
more proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding 
of it. Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2105. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: TENNIS
This course is designed to present the activity of tennis, so that the students become more 
proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding of it. 
Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2106. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: RACQUETBALL
This course is designed to present the activity of racquetball, so that the students become 
more proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding 
of it. Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2107. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: SOFTBALL
This course is designed to present the activity of softball, so that the students become 
more proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding 
of it. Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2108. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: JOGGING
This course is designed to present the activity of jogging, so that the students become 
more proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding 
of it. Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2109. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: PICKLEBALL
This course is designed to present the activity of pickleball, so that students become more 
proficient at this sport and increase their enjoyment, knowledge and understanding of it. 
Does not fulfill EXSI core requirement. 
2120.  SPORT MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM:  
RECREATION–INTRAMURALS
This is an experiential course in which the entry-level sport management major takes 
part in practical recreation and intramural management tasks and engages in focused 
reflection through academic work to construct the knowledge, skills and values needed 
by professionals in the sport management industry. The assigned facility operation 
management tasks are predominantly completed on-campus. 
standing. May be repeated.
2204.  READINGS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE  
AND SPORT MANAGEMENT
This course will focus on the scope and limitations of scientific research in the field of 
Exercise Science and Sport through an examination of published research literature. The 
course will examine the research process and encourage critical analysis of content area 
research in a seminar environment. Specifically, students will focus on the development 
of a literature review, hypotheses testing and the writing styles of the author(s). The focus 
of the literature will vary based on the preference of the professor. 
of the instructor.
2302. SCIENTIFIC PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
This course introduces the student to the three scientific disciplines directly related 
to human performance: Sports Psychology, Biomechanics and Exercise Physiology. 
Categorization and presentation of information occurs in two separate areas: First, an 
investigation of the basis of human performance occurs. Secondly, scientific topics, 
directly applicable to coaching situations, are presented.
2305. SCIENTIFIC FOUNDATIONS OF HUMAN PERFORMANCE
This course is designed to provide EXSI majors with an introduction to the physiology 
of active human skeletal muscle and how the various body systems adapt to chronic 
exercise. In addition, students will learn how this information applies to a variety of 
populations. This class will provide students the basic Exercise Science knowledge that 
is represented on national personal training certification exams.
2310. INTRODUCTION TO SPORT MANAGEMENT
This course investigates the scope of the sport industry nationally and internationally. 
Functions of management and requisite skills of sport managers will be a primary focus. 
Attention will be given to the managerial process and its relationship to sport organizations 
and their products. Students will become acquainted with career opportunities in the sport 
management field.
2370.  TOPICS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE  
AND SPORTS MANAGEMENT
This course is an intensive study of a specific topic within the realm of Exercise Science 
and Sport Management. It may be repeated when topics vary.
3106. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY LAB

3306. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY
This is an advanced study of the physiology of human systems, including weekly 
laboratory session. This course is intended for students preparing for graduate or 
professional school in the health sciences. See BIOL 3306 and 3106. 
2301 and 2101, 2302 and 2102 and Junior standing, or consent of instructor. Concurrent 
enrollment in lab EXSI 3106. (3-3)
3307. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION FOR SPECIAL POPULATIONS
This course will focus on the study of aerobic and anaerobic concepts of fitness, focusing 
on the relationships between lifestyle and risk factors of cardiovascular, metabolic and 
pulmonary diseases. Special emphasis will be placed upon exercise testing and writing 
exercise prescriptions to improve the health of various special populations. As part of 
successful completion of the class, participants will earn First Aid/CPR certification. 

3320.  MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION  
IN EXERCISE SCIENCE-R
This course introduces the student to the statistical tools necessary to select, analyze and 
interpret test data, pertinent to the field of Exercise Science. Students also investigate 
various physical, cognitive and psychomotor tests and the importance of insuring 
validity, reliability and objectivity in testing procedures. 
Junior standing.
3321. APPLIED ANATOMY AND KINESIOLOGY
This course examines the anatomical structures and mechanical aspects of human 
movement. Emphasis is placed on understanding the functional anatomy of the 
musculoskeletal and articular systems. In addition, pathologies of upper and lower 
extremities and trunk will be examined as to contributions to abnormal patterns of 
posture, movement and locomotion. Basic neuromuscular and bio-mechanical principles 
are introduced. Students will be required to apply their knowledge of anatomy towards 
understanding individual joint function as well as the integrated function of several joints 
during complex activities such as normal human locomotion. 
2101, 2302, 2102 or consent of instructor and Junior standing.
3323. SPORT LAW
This course is designed to provide physical educators, coaches and other practitioners in 
the field of exercise science with a background in fundamental legal considerations and 
the relationship to the working environment. Topics include: The nature of legal concern 
in physical education and sport; legal duties of practitioners in the field; supervision; 
safe environments; matters such as waivers, insurance, transportation; and the rights of 
practitioners and their clients/students. 
3324. BIOMECHANICS
Biomechanics is a foundational undergraduate course in biomechanics that applies 
and builds on the concepts of Anatomy and Physiology. This course will introduce the 
concepts of mechanics as they apply to human movement and performance. This course 
will provide an introductory background in biomechanics for students preparing for 
a career in Exercise Science, physical therapy, or medical school. Course topics will 
include analysis of forces in static biological systems, linear and angular dynamics of 
human movement, energy and power in human activity, application of stress and strain 
analysis to biological tissues. 
3325. ETHICS IN SPORTS
This course will engage students in an exploration of major issues, ethical theories, moral 
reasoning and their operation of programs in sport, physical activity, fitness and athletics. 

3326. SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY
This course will address how psychological factors influence participation and 
performance in physical activity, as well as how involvement in physical activity 
influences the psychological make-up of the individual. Topics discussed in sport and 
exercise psychology include, among others, motivation, anxiety, mood, emotion, self-
confidence, imagery, and performance enhancement. 
3330. THE HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF SPORT IN AMERICA
This course examines the role of sport in American culture from the indigenous peoples 
to the modern day. This examination includes an analysis of the history and philosophy of 
sport and exercise science (physical education) in the United States and the contributions 
of women, men, and various social movements to this history. To accomplish this 
analysis, students study the historical issues of competition, race, ethnicity, and gender 
in relation to social, political, cultural, and economic philosophies. 
standing and EXSI 1301.
3340. THE STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF SPORT
This course analyzes the growth and development of sport in a global fashion with a 
special emphasis on the structure and organization of various sports bodies. These 
include youth sports organizations, public school athletic associations, club/select sports 
programs, intercollegiate athletics, professional sports institutions, and international 
sports alliances. Students study the basics of organization, hierarchical structures at all 
levels, and the production of sporting events (minor to major, local to international). 
Additionally, historical influences upon current structural and organizational sports 
models in the United States are considered. 
3341. THE SOCIOLOGY OF SPORT
“The Sociology of Sport” is designed to examine sport as it impacts upon various social 
institutions: including, but not limited to, education, politics, economics, family structure, 
and religion. Additionally, the undercurrents of society, such as racism, gender issues, 
and class conflict, will be examined. This examination will result in students having a 
better understanding of sport and society. These and other issues will be discussed and 
examined in this course. This is a three-credit hour course required for some degree 
programs in Exercise Science, or it may be used as elective credit in a degree program. 

3345. SPORT FACILITY DESIGN AND OPERATION
This course is intended to assist the sport management or exercise science practitioner 
with understanding the variety of elements which are involved in the planning and 
administration of athletics/recreational facilities. An analysis of the management 
process involved in the designing and managing of a sport facility, as well as the skills 
and processes associated with administering a sport event will be considered. Whether 
the event is participant-centered (e.g. road race, youth tennis tournament) or spectator-
centered (e.g., college football game, basketball game, professional golf tournament) all 
facets of even organization will be examined. 
3350. SPORT MARKETING AND PROMOTION
This is an application of the fundamental principles used in the marketing of sport and 
events. It is an introduction to service quality for increasing customer satisfaction and 
effectiveness of sport organizations. 
3380.  DIRECTED STUDY EXERCISE SCIENCE  
AND SPORT MANAGEMENT
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and registrar. Enrolling students must have upper-level status and at least a 2.0 
GPA. This course may be repeated when topics vary. 
standing or consent of instructor.
3398. INTERNSHIP IN EXERCISE SCIENCE
This course is designed to provide practical/clinical experiences to the non-teacher 
certification Exercise Science major. Course can be repeated once. 
hours earned.
3405. THEORY AND METHODS: TEACHING ACTIVITIES
This is the study of methods necessary to teach individual, dual and team activities 
in instructional settings. The course investigates training theories, philosophies and 
strategies of teaching, curricular considerations and other aspects of performance. 
Practical application and participation activities are conducted. 
standing.
4122. EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY LAB

4126. EXERCISE TESTING-PRESCRIPTION LAB

4322. EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY
This course is designed to first review the basic physiology concepts discussed in EXSI 
2305 and previous Biology classes. This course will then provide an in-depth analysis 
of major body systems including cardiovascular, nervous, pulmonary, endocrine and 
muscular. Weekly laboratory exercises will include investigation of maximal oxygen 
consumption, lactate and ventilator threshold, parameters of muscular strength and EKG 
stress testing, among others. Concurrent enrollment in any of the prerequisites is not 
allowed. 
standing. Concurrent enrollment in lab EXSI 4122.
4323. MOTOR LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
The focus of this course is the motor development changes that occur through the lifetime. 
There will be a focus on the motor development changes that occur from childhood 
through adulthood. This course will also emphasize the study of how motor development 
changes influence motor learning. This course will address the topics of fundamental 
locomotor skills, sensory contributions to skilled performance, environmental factors 
that influence learning, information processing, and age-related changes to motor 
development. 
4324.  ATHLETIC TRAINING: INJURY TREATMENT  
AND PREVENTION
This is a study of recognition, diagnosis, and treatment of athletic injuries. The study of 
methods of conditioning to prevent injury and rehabilitate injured athletes. 
BIOL 2301, 2101, 2302, 2102 or consent of instructor and Junior standing. (2-1)
4325. NUTRITION AND EXERCISE PERFORMANCE
This course will review the fundamental principles of human nutrition and the current 
knowledge of the impact of diet on human performance. The dietary nutrients that provide 
energy for movement, the factors that affect the sources of energy during exercise, and 
the concept of energy balance and its effect on body weight and body composition will 
be discussed. 
1103, and EXSI 4322, 4122, Junior standing.
4326. EXERCISE TESTING AND PRESCRIPTION
This course focuses on the study of methods of determining fitness levels and developing 
safe exercise programs, and developing and administering group exercise programs. 
Emphasis is placed on exercise testing, evaluation techniques, and exercise prescription. 

4327.  ADVANCED TECHNIQUES OF STRENGTH  
AND CONDITIONING
This course provides students with practical experiences in resistance exercise and 
spotting techniques. Particular focus will be spent on exercise prescription and 
periodization techniques. This course will utilize scientific principles of resistance 
training and strength/power with an emphasis on applications for improving health and 
performance. 
4330. SPORT FINANCE
This course is an introduction to financial analysis and budgeting techniques in the 
context of sport organizations; conventional and innovative methods for the acquisition 
of revenue available to sport organizations. 
4341. ATHLETICS ADMINISTRATION
This course will provide students with an overview and orientation for sport administration, 
leadership, and coaching. Content areas will include organizational behavior, leadership 
styles, financial management, governance, diversity and other issues that are relevant in 
competitive athletic settings. 
4370. TOPICS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE
This course provides an in-depth study of various topics in Exercise Science, which may 
not be offered in the regular Exercise Science curriculum. This course may be repeated 
when the topics vary. 
4395. RESEARCH APPLICATION – R
This is a senior level course that is designed to teach students and help them apply 
research method designs, common methods of analyses, and interpreting research data. 

3320 is not allowed.
4396. CERTIFICATION PREPARATION
This course prepares students to sit for a field-related certification examination offered 
by the respective certifying organization. The most expert faculty member in the chosen 
field will guide the student in an independent study of the exam material. At the end of the 
course, students are encouraged to register for and complete the certification examination 
or activities. 
FINANCE (FIN)
2301. PERSONAL FINANCE
This course is a study of financial related issues encountered in managing personal 
economic and life affairs. Students explore sources of personal income, saving options, 
credit management, consumer spending, buying a home versus renting, insurance, 
budgeting, managing your taxes, automobile leasing and buying, investing and retirement 
planning, career planning, resumes, and interviewing techniques.
2342. PRINCIPLES OF FINANCE
This course is an introduction to analytical financial management, including short-term 
credit policies, capital budgeting, risk, long-term funding, financial leverage, and the cost 
of capital. Special topics such as mergers, consolidations, bankruptcy, and reorganizations 
will also be considered. 
3362. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND MARKETS
This course is an in-depth study of the US financial systems, the financial intermediation 
process, and the role of money. Among the topics covered are interest rates, credit 
markets and investments, money and inflation, and regulation of financial institutions. 

3363. MANAGERIAL FINANCE: MARKETS AND THE FIRM
This course examines the power that microeconomics has on business-related decision-
making processes within the firm. The course examines traditional principles of price 
theory, market and organizational behavior, strategic management, human resource 
management, and related emerging issues. Students will explore logic and conceptual 
modeling of costs, prices, markets, and personnel as well as the cost/benefit that each 
business decision has towards maximizing sustainable and ethical profit. The course 
addresses the concept and skills required of the “T”-shaped professional. Optional travel 
may be included. 
3364.  INTERNATIONAL FINANCE AND THE ECONOMICS  
OF MICROFINANCE
The course strives to build upon the Principles of Finance foundation, recognizing 
that national and multinational corporations continue to expand globally. This course 
provides a background on the international environment and focuses on the managerial 
aspects from a corporate perspective, providing and developing the tools throughout the 
course to understand the international financial environment so as to effectively manage 
within it. The second half of the course introduces an accessible and engaging analysis 
of the challenges of the global expansion of finance in emerging markets, as well as 
presenting the key ideas driving micro finance, integrating theory with empirical data 
and addressing a range of issues, including savings and insurance, the role of women, 
impact measurement, and management incentives. This course may include optional 
travel. 
3365. FINANCIAL MANAGING FOR VALUE CREATION
Financial Managing for Value Creation is a course that recognizes the importance of 
using financial information to maximize firm value through a analytical introduction 
to financial management. Based on modern finance principles, the course presents an 
advanced focus on the most recent financial data and latest references subjected to a high 
level of practicality and rigorous analysis within the context of financial management 
problems that executives commonly face. In addition, related case studies analyze the 
same set of companies throughout the text to provide a common thread that reinforces the 
principles and practices of value creation. Optional travel may be included. 
FIN 2342.
3371. THE EUROPEAN UNION AND BEYOND
The European Union and Beyond investigates a wide range of market realities, tensions 
and public policy decisions that have shaped the history, as well as current societal and 
economic successes and challenges facing the European Union. The course provides a 
rich setting that provides a deeper understanding of the interconnectedness of cultures, 
policies, and economies across the European Union, directed through engagement of 
shared readings, daily discussions and weekly writing assignments. 
4361. INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT
This course is a study of stocks, bonds and options, basic mechanics and principles of 
investing and portfolio management, pricing and analysis of securities and derivative 
instruments, and option strategies. 
and MATH 2330.
4362. INTERMEDIATE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
This is a study of corporate valuations, strategic investment decisions, working capital 
management, and tactical and strategic financing decisions. Special topics also include 
derivatives, risk management, mergers, and bankruptcy, reorganization, and liquidation. 

4364. RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE
This course focuses on understanding the contemporary methods of identifying, 
appraising, and measuring risks that may cause severe loss or interrupt an organization’s 
functional continuity. The techniques utilized to analyze and manage risk exposures are 
also explored. Students will study the traditional tool of risk management: insurance, 
specifically, life, health, disability, property and casualty, liability, loss of income, business 
interruption, and other forms of insurance will be examined in detail. 
2342.
4366. REAL ESTATE FINANCE AND INVESTING
This is a study of real estate ownership, agency, contracts, disclosures, title transfer, 
deeds, leasing, mortgage instruments, and career opportunities. Students will explore the 
respective activities of real estate sales, property management, and ownership. Special 
emphasis on types of financing: adjustable mortgages, blended-rate loans, reverse 
mortgages, equity sharing, wraparounds, graduated payments, blanket mortgages, and 
seller financing. The course does not satisfy any licensing requirements for realtors or 
brokers. 
4370. TOPICS IN FINANCE
This is a study of selected topics in the field of business. Topics will vary; course may be 
repeated. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN FINANCE
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the dean. 
and FIN 2342. May be repeated as topics vary.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN FINANCE
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student 
to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. 
approved internship application.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN FINANCE
This is an independent research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or comparable 
senior project. 
5312. RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
This course will focus on developing skills, knowledge, and abilities associated with 
financial planning and management control systems in complex organizations. Topics 
covered include: financial theory, methods and techniques that support effective analysis 
of the financial implications of program alternatives, cash and capital budgeting, risk 
and return analysis, and long-range financial planning in the current day managerial 
environment. 
FRENCH (FREN)
Students with a placement score at the level of FREN 1402 or above may, upon written 
request to the Registrar, be given credit for required courses at the appropriate level.
1401. ELEMENTARY FRENCH I
This is an introductory course which focuses upon basic reading, writing, listening and 
speaking of French. Significant aspects of French-language cultures are also addressed. 
This course is the first in a sequence of introductory French courses.
1402. ELEMENTARY FRENCH II
This course, a continuation of FREN 1401, expands reading, writing, listening and 
speaking skills as it expands knowledge of French-language cultural traits. 
2303. (2311) INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I
This course provides a comprehensive review of major grammatical structures and 
vocabulary and expands upon them via cultural and contemporary readings. Course 
conducted primarily in French. 
score.
2304. (2312) INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II
This course expands upon information presented in FREN 2303. Course conducted 
primarily in French. 
4370. TOPICS IN FRENCH
This is a study of subjects not otherwise offered. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN FRENCH
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally, students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
GERMAN (GERM)
Students with a placement score at the level of GERM 1402 or above may, upon written 
request to the Registrar, be given credit for required courses at the appropriate level.
1401. ELEMENTARY GERMAN I
This is an introductory course which focuses upon basic reading, writing, listening and 
speaking of German. Significant aspects of German-language cultures are also addressed. 
This course is the first in a sequence of introductory German courses.
1402. ELEMENTARY GERMAN II
This course, a continuation of GERM 1401, expands reading, writing, listening and 
speaking skills as it expands knowledge of German-language cultural traits. 
2303. (2311) INTERMEDIATE GERMAN I
This course provides a comprehensive review of major grammatical structures and 
vocabulary and expands upon them via cultural and contemporary readings. Course 
conducted primarily in German. 
test score.
2304. (2312) INTERMEDIATE GERMAN II
This course expands upon information presented in GERM 2303. Course conducted 
primarily in German. 
4370. TOPICS IN GERMAN
This is a study of subjects not otherwise offered. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN GERMAN
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
GRAPHIC DESIGN (DESN) 
(see Art and Design)
1301. PRINCIPLES OF TWO DIMENSIONAL DESIGN
This is a studio course concentrating on the elements and principles of two-dimensional 
design intended primarily for the design major, but it also fulfills the fine arts requirement 
for the core curriculum and for certain other degrees. This is NOT recommended for 
non-Art majors. While the emphasis will be on studio exercises and problems, other 
instructional methods will include lecture, demonstration, audio/visual presentations, 
guest lectures, and field trips. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. (3-3)
1303. INTRODUCTION TO DESIGN
This course offers a diverse investigation of the universal principles of design from 
scientific and cultural perspectives. It is a discussion of the contributions of design thinking 
to the understanding of observation, problem solving, traditional and contemporary 
techniques for implementation, as well as the influence of the arts and sciences to 
design impacting society. More time is allotted for this course to allow for field trips and 
assignments in various two- and three-dimensional media. This is an introductory art 
class recommended to fulfill the core fine arts requirement for non-art majors. A studio 
supplies fee will be assessed.
2304. COMPUTER ILLUSTRATION
An intermediate graphic design course, which explores the methods and techniques of 
computer-generated illustration. An emphasis on compositional development, visual 
problem-solving, verbal articulation and presentation of creative projects will be 
accentuated. This course focuses on idea generation of logo design, corporate identity 
packages, and branding through the application of illustration software. A studio supplies 
fee will be assessed. 
2360. INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRONIC MEDIA
An introductory course to electronic media and interactive multimedia focused on 
the creation of electronic media and content management. This course will focus on 
brainstorming and creativity exercises and be expressed through the application of 
electronic media. If taken on-line, to participate in this course, on-line students must 
have access to the latest version of the software being utilized in this class (please consult 
with the instructor), and high speed internet access. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 

2450. TYPOGRAPHY I
An introductory course in the art of lettering, as well as a comprehensive overview 
of the history of typography and basic typographic design. The focus of the class will 
span from the beginning of written communication through the beginning of the 20th 
century. This course explores the evolution of symbols and letterforms, type anatomy, 
syntax, and formatting for effective communication design, as well as creative and 
expressive contexts. Also explored is the impact of technology on type design. This is a 
dual disciplinary course, which includes a formal survey component of graphic design to 
recognize and appreciate historic milestones, with a design studio to apply this knowledge 
and develop artistic and technical skills with a deeper cognitive understanding of their 
origins and application. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
level standing or consent of the instructor. (3-3)
3301. PACKAGING AND WAY-FINDING SOLUTIONS
This course explores the creation of packaging, sign-age, and interactive way-finding 
design solutions. Coursework will be created using traditional methods as well as virtual 
3D modeling software, with a focus on conceptual and critical thinking. Emerging 
technologies will be incorporated into course work for the creation of laser engraved/cut 
sign-age solutions and package prototypes will be created utilizing 3D printer technology. 
A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
3312. MULTIMEDIA
This course is an introduciton to the wide-ranging use of computers in the production of 
film and videotape and the implications for its future use. The histories of both media, 
as well as techniques for design implementation, are covered. Students generate scripts 
and story boards and produce titling and optical effects in the lab, integrating image 
manipulation software and other image processing support. Projects focus on corporate 
identity and other individual applications in the computer graphics industry. A studio 
supplies fee will be assessed. 
3322. WEB DESIGN – R
This course will explore current techniques in web design and development, with 
emphasis given toward front end development, authoring, creation, implementation, 
and management of web pages using various web development tools such as Adobe 
Dreamweaver, Adobe Edge Animate and Text Editing applications such as Coda and 
Komodo. Programming language and tools employed include HTML, CSS, JAVA and 
JAVASCRIPT.
3325. ILLUSTRATION FOR DESIGN
This course addresses advanced concepts in illustration and seeks to expand students’ 
capability to solve visual problems with creative, individual and expressive imagery. 
Assignments provide the context for this exploration and challenge students to explore 
new territory in their search for ideas. Practical illustration problems encountered in 
creating art for publication, advertising, typography, packaging, and other design forms 
will be addressed. Illustration for design embraces strong conceptual approaches to 
picture making and stresses the interpretation of narrative. Idea development within 
structured practical application, originality, aesthetics, appropriateness of imagery, and 
technical proficiency are emphasized. Various materials, techniques, and media are 
explored, including the readying of materials for digital and print publication. Unique 
approaches to problem solving are encouraged. 
consent of instructor.
3350. GRAPHIC DESIGN I
This course concentrates on applications of graphic design principles and theory through 
the study of typographic function and page layout using Adobe InDesign. Individual 
design work and group collaboration is required while a creative process is developed. 
Professionalism and attention to detail are emphasized as techniques in design critique 
and presentation refinement are explored. Students demonstrate and refine their skills 
by working with actual clients seeking real-world solutions to communication needs. A 
studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
3430 with a “C” or better AND pass Mid-Point Review within the Communication 
Design Major.
3430. TYPOGRAPHY II
This course surveys the history of graphic design from the beginning of the 20th 
Century to the present, with an emphasis on typography and graphic design through the 
development of rational methodologies with consideration of form, unity and technology. 
This is a dual disciplinary course, which includes a formal survey component of graphic 
design to recognize and appreciate historic milestones, with a design studio to apply this 
knowledge and develop artistic and technical skills with a deeper cognitive understanding 
of their origins and application. 
2450 with a “C” or better. (3-3)
4302. BRANDING SOLUTIONS
Building on the multiple client experiences in Graphic Design I, this advanced graphic 
design course explores corporate identity and advertising strategies focused on an 
immersive semester long single client experience. Students will select a client and 
collaborate with the instructor and client to determine the development of a branding 
and marketing strategy, including print and multimedia processes that satisfy client 
needs. This course will also serve as preparation for DESN 4360-Professional Portfolio, 
in which previously completed projects will be reviewed and polished for the student 
portfolio. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
and DESN 3350.
4310. PRE-PRESS AND PRINT MANAGEMENT
This course includes the preparation and output of digital computer files on state-of-the-art 
digital printers using a variety of software. The course will stress the correct preparation 
of files for optimal output results. Emphasis will be on the proper calibration of printers 
and computer to optimize final output quality. Also stressed will be the understanding 
of paper, its characteristics, and how to choose the correct paper and ink within the 
budget constraints of a given job. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
4312. MOTION GRAPHICS
This is an advanced course intended to train designers interested in motion graphics and 
digital media. Students will learn and explore the techniques of motion graphics creation 
through the use of software programs utilized by design studios. This course emphasizes 
design from a problem-solving point of view with an emphasis in concepting, form 
generation, timing, and appropriate image and typographic selection as a means of visual 
communication. A studio supplies fee will be assessed. 
“C” or better.
4320. ADVANCED WEB DESIGN
This course will explore advanced techniques in front-end web design and development, 
authoring, creation, implementation, and management of web pages using various design 
tools such as Adobe Dreamweaver, Adobe Edge Animate, Text Editing applications, and 
Content Management Systems. Special emphasis is given toward responsive web design 
that is targeted for mobile and tablet devices. Programming language and tools employed 
include HTMI, CSS, JAVA and JAVASCRIPT. 
4351. GRAPHIC DESIGN II
This course explores advanced design solutions to real-world client communication 
needs. Students work directly with actual clients who are seeking creative solutions to 
their communication design needs. Personal creative skills are refined as students expand 
their personal creative style while aligning with client needs. The class operates as a 
professional design firm to hone individual and collaborative skills. Students have the 
opportunity to be part of a design team while working with authentic clients from outside 
the University. Creative interaction is fostered and leadership skills are developed through 
Art Director and Creative director positions on projects. Professionalism, attention to 
detail, and verbal skills are emphasized through client presentations and critique. The 
course may contain an optional travel component during school breaks. 
4360. PROFESSIONAL PORTFOLIO
In preparation for job interviews, a graphic design portfolio is assembled and refined. 
Students make preparation for entering a career field or pursuing graduate studies. 
Working individually with an instructor, each student selects pieces showcasing work that 
represents a unique style and demonstrates over-all conceptual abilities. In coordination 
with the printed portfolio, students will develop and publish a web site that will serve as 
their on-line portfolio. This course should be taken in the last year of the degree program 
just prior to DESN 4399: Senior Project. A formal application process into DESN 4399: 
Senior Project in Graphic Design course will be conducted. A studio supplies fee will be 
assessed. 
of instructor.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN GRAPHIC DESIGN
Faculty members coordinate the program with upper-level students to work part-time 
with cooperating employers. This course provides the opportunity to apply prior learning 
to supervised practical field circumstances and gain employment experience. Students 
are required to keep a log, communicate weekly with the supervising instructor, and 
maintain attendance requirements. Although the faculty will assist, it is the responsibility 
of the student to acquire the internship. Course may be repeated once for credit as an 
elective. 
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN GRAPHIC DESIGN
This is the culmination of the degree program. This capstone course is the visualization 
of the thesis developed and presented during DESN 4360: Professional Portfolio with 
emphasis on visual and verbal communication. The student will produce an exhibition 
of their work that demonstrates their creativity and professionalism as a designer. The 
student will finalize their professional print and website portfolio begun in DESN 4360: 
Professional Portfolio. A senior exit interview will be conducted at the end of the semester. 

proposals in the semester before the Senior Project course is to be taken.
HEALTH SCIENCES
Schreiner University offers four degrees in the Health Sciences to prepare students to 
enter graduate programs in Pre-Occupational Therapy, Pre-Pharmacy, Pre-Physician 
Assistant, and Pre-Chiropractic Medicine. The four tracks allow a variety of upper level 
courses in Psychology, Biology, Chemistry and Public Health. The distinctions for each 
major are listed within the collateral and prerequisite courses. 
Schreiner offers the Bachelor of Arts Health Sciences in Pre-Occupational Therapy and 
the Bachelor of Science Health Sciences in Pre-Pharmacy, Pre-Physician Assistant and 
Pre-Chiropractic Medicine.
HISTORY (HIST)
1301.  (1301) UNITED STATES HISTORY  
THROUGH THE CIVIL WAR
This is an analysis of United States history from its colonial foundations through the 
Civil War. Areas of study include the Revolution, the promulgation of the Constitution, 
the Federalist period, Jacksonianism, Manifest Destiny, and a causal analysis of the 
Civil War.
1302. (1302) UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE THE CIVIL WAR
This is a continuation of United States history covering such topics as Reconstruction, 
Populism, Progressivism, the two world wars, and the post-World War II period.
1350. (2321) WORLD CIVILIZATIONS TO 1This is an historical study of man from ancient times to the beginning of the modern age. 
Emphasis is on the social, cultural, and intellectual history of the period.
1351. (2322) WORLD CIVILIZATIONS FROM 1This is an historical study of the rise of man from the Renaissance. Topics include the 
rise of modern thought, the genesis of modern science, industrialism and its byproducts, 
nationalism, and the two world wars. The emphasis is on the intellectual, social, and 
cultural history of the period.
2170. TOPICS IN HISTORY
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in history, either American, European, non-
Western. May be repeated when topics vary.
2270. TOPICS IN HISTORY
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in history, either American, European, non-
Western. May be repeated when topics vary.
2303. (2301) TEXAS HISTORY
This is a study of Texas from 1517 to the present. Topics include colonial status, 
nationhood, statehood; reconstruction; the rise of the cattle kingdom; expansion of 
transportation and industry; and recent political, economic, and social developments.
2350. INTRODUCTION TO HISTORICAL METHODS
This course is designed to acquaint prospective history majors with the skills and 
knowledge to think critically about historical perspectives and eras and to write papers 
based on sound historical research methods. 
1350/1351 or consent of the instructor.
2370. TOPICS IN HISTORY
This is an indepth study of particular topics in history either American, European or Non-
Western. May be repeated when topics vary.
3311. TOPICS IN U.S. HISTORY FROM 1This is a history of the United States’ recent past. Utilizing specific themes, students 
will develop a thorough understanding of the political, social, economic, and cultural 
developments of the period. Themes, such as Civil Rights in the U.S., American Popular 
Culture, U.S. in the World Wars, and The Modern Presidency will be offered on a rotating 
schedule. 
for credit when topics vary.
3313. AMERICAN WOMEN’S HISTORY
This course is an examination of American women from the colonial period to the present. 
Within the context of race and class in the United States, the course will look at the social, 
cultural, political and economic roles of women and their contribution to American life 
and society. The focus of the class will be not only on the status of women in American 
history but also on what their status tells us about larger issues in American history and 
life. 
3318. U.S. AND GLOBAL SOUTH SINCE 1This course will discuss how themes of decolonization, Cold War, Third World 
nationalism, immigration, drug trafficking, Islamic radicalism, and terrorism have 
characterized U.S. relations with countries in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East 
since the end of the Second World War. 
3319. EUROPE, ANCIENT TO MEDIEVAL
This course will provide an overview of the political, diplomatic, social, and cultural 
history of Europe from prehistory to the fourteenth century. Beginning with the ancient 
world and the first migrations into Europe, the course will cover watershed topics such 
as migration patterns, first civilizations, classical Greece and Rome, North and East 
European cultures and society, and the development of European Christianity. It will 
conclude with an overview of the Medieval Period, and set the stage for the shift into 
modern European history.
3327. MODERN EASTERN EUROPE AND RUSSIA
This course will provide an overview of the political, diplomatic, social, and cultural 
history of Eastern Europe from the eighteenth century to the present. The course 
begins by considering the region’s experience with modernization under the Hapsburg, 
Ottoman, and Russian empires until their breakup after World War I. It will then examine 
the political reorganization of the region during the interwar period, its experience during 
World War II, and then the communist era. It will conclude with an examination of the 
anti-communist revolutions from 1989-1991 and the post-communist period.
3328. MODERN WESTERN EUROPE
This course will provide an overview of the political, diplomatic, social, and cultural 
history of Western Europe from the fourteenth century to the present. Beginning with the 
Renaissance, the course will cover watershed topics such as the Reformation, imperial 
expansion, the Enlightenment, the Age of Revolutions, and industrialization. It will then 
address Western Europe during the World Wars and the Cold War, while concluding with 
a look at contemporary Europe.
3331. EUROPE IN THE WORLD WARS
This course will consider World War I and World War II in Europe from a variety of 
historical perspectives, including diplomatic, military, political, social, and cultural. It 
will address the conditions that led to the outbreak of the World Wars, the objectives and 
outcomes of the parties involved, and the impact of the wars on Europe domestically.
3341. IMMIGRATION HISTORY
This course is an in-depth analysis of the history of immigration and immigrant 
communities based on the reading and discussion of significant historical texts. It considers 
immigration from a global perspective, but with a focus on immigrant communities in the 
United States and Texas in particular.
3342. LATIN AMERICAN – U.S. RELATIONS SINCE 1This course will discuss U.S.-Latin American relations since the early 1800s. It will 
compare and contrast the paths to independent statehood between the United States and 
Latin American states; the rationale for U.S. territorial and commercial expansion into 
the Western Hemisphere during the nineteenth century; the ways in which revolution 
throughout Central America and the Caribbean initiated constant U.S. intervention into 
Latin American affairs during the early twentieth century, and how fears of the spread 
of Communism during the Cold War renewed U.S. interventionism into Latin America; 
the social and political effects of globalization (the “Washington consensus”) on U.S.-
Latin American relations after the end of the Cold War, as well as problems such as the 
swing to the political left, the proliferation of crime, and immigration since the 1990s. 

3352. HISTORY OF MEXICO
This is the history of Mexico before 1910 and more intensive study of the later periods. 
Both domestic and foreign affairs considered; emphasis on Mexico’s relations with other 
nations of the Western World. 
political science.
3361. MODERN EAST ASIA
This course is an examination of contemporary Chinese and Japanese history designed to 
acquaint students with the broad historical, cultural and economic factors that make these 
countries unique and interesting. May also include Indochina and Korea. 
HIST 1301/1302 or HIST 1350/ 1351 or consent of instructor.
3362. THE VIETNAM WARS, 1950-1This course provides a detailed analysis of U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia from the 
1940s to 1970s. Students will discuss various topics during our semester: the origins 
of Vietnamese nationalism, how the First Indochina War fit within a larger context 
of decolonization after World War II, why Cold War diplomacy determined a U.S. 
commitment to contain the spread of Communism in Vietnam, and the reasons why the 
United States engaged in an all-out war in Vietnam by 1965. Students will discuss how 
the U.S. military strategy of containment contrasted with the Vietnamese nationalists’ 
struggle for self-determination. And will analyze how the Vietnam War ended the Cold 
War consensus in U.S. society. The study will include how the United States’ loss of the 
Vietnam War showed the shortcomings of U.S. power, left a powerful and bitter legacy 
for Americans, and influenced the practice of U.S. foreign policy for decades to follow. 

3395. READINGS IN HISTORY
This course is an in-depth analysis of U.S. European, or Global history based on reading 
of significant historical texts. 

when topics vary.
4360. DISCOURSES IN HISTORY
This is a capstone course that focuses on an in-depth analysis of historical inquiry; its 
nature, process, lessons, limitations, and value. 
senior status, or consent of instructor.
4370. TOPICS IN HISTORY
This is a study of specific in-depth and analytical study of particular topics in history, 
either American, European, or non-Western. May be repeated when topics vary.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN HISTORY
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN HISTORY
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project. 
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES (IDST)
1101. FRESHMAN STUDIES
This first-year seminar is designed to introduce the incoming college student to the 
academy of research, scholarship, thought, and knowledge. The seminar will investigate 
a variety of relevant and timely topics which will vary from section to section. Each 
class will emphasize close and critical reading, lively class discussions, and practice in 
academic research and writing.
1102.  MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY –  
FRESHMAN (SPRING)
This course is the freshmen common course requirement for the Mountaineer Leadership 
Academy. The course explores and reflects on different leadership philosophies of 
servant leadership, relational leadership, social model of leadership, and transformational 
leadership, to create a foundation of understanding for students to begin to establish a 
personal leadership philosophy. 
of instructor.
1105. HONORS SEMINAR
This is designed specifically for freshmen honors students. Discussion topics will span a 
range of ideas and will include The World of Politics, Economics, Psychology, Science, 
Philosophy, and The Arts. 
1301. FRESHMAN STUDIES
This first-year seminar is designed to introduce the incoming college student to the 
academy of research, scholarship, thought, and knowledge. The seminar will investigate 
a variety of relevant and timely topics which will vary from section to section. Each 
class will emphasize close and critical reading, lively class discussions, and practice in 
academic research and writing.
1320.  THE SCHREINER EXPERIENCE  
FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
This class is designed to introduce the incoming international student to university and 
national practices and culture while also supporting students’ continued improvement of 
English language skills for specific academic and professional contexts. In this course, 
students will learn to navigate the different customs of U.S. universities generally and 
Schreiner University specifically. Through written assignments, presentations, and 
projects, students will reflect on the challenges of adapting to U.S. culture as they 
simultaneously work to enhance their command of academic English and other related 
skills for classroom success. 
1370. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
2101.  MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY –  
SOPHOMORE (FALL)
This course is the Sophomore fall semester common course requirement for the 
Mountaineer Leadership Academy. The course explores and reflects on group dynamics 
of leadership collaboration. Students will apply their leadership skills through a semester 
long collaboration assignment occurring on campus to establish an understanding of 
group dynamics associated with leadership collaboration. 
Mountaineer Leadership Academy Freshmen Course.
2102.  MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY –  
SOPHOMORE (SPRING)
This course is the Sophomore spring semester common course requirement for the 
Mountaineer Leadership Academy. The course explores and reflects on group dynamics 
of leadership collaboration relative to being a part of a community. Students will apply 
their leadership skills through a semester long collaboration assignment occurring off 
campus within the Kerrville community to establish an understanding of group dynamics 
associated with leadership collaboration within a community. 
of Mountaineer Leadership Academy Sophomore Fall course.
2170. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
2200. CAREER EXPLORATION
This course provides the opportunity for students to explore academic goals and to define 
career choices.
2270. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
2305. PERSPECTIVES IN CRITICAL THINKING
This course in reasoning, rhetoric, and argumentation offers a study of the process by 
which one develops and supports one’s beliefs with clear, unambiguous arguments and 
evaluates the arguments of others in real life situations.
2370. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
A study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
3101.  MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY –  
JUNIOR (FALL)
This course is the Junior Fall semester common course requirement for the Mountaineer 
Leadership Academy. The course explores and reflects on being a leader within a 
community through the development and implementation of the Kerrville Leaders of 
Tomorrow program. Students will apply their leadership skills through a semester long 
assignment focusing on coordinating the details of a sustained community leadership 
develop program for community High School and College students. 
3102.  MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY –  
JUNIOR (SPRING)
This course is the Junior Spring semester common course requirement for the 
Mountaineer Leadership Academy. The course explores and reflects on being a leader 
within a community through the development and implementation of Kerrville Leaders 
of Tomorrow program. Students will apply their leadership skills through a semester long 
assignment focusing on coordinating and facilitating a sustained community leadership 
develop program for community High School and College students. 
3170. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
A study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
3205. HONORS COLLOQUIUM: AMERICAN CULTURE
This is a focused research and discussion group with an American-studies emphasis 
designed specifically for honors students. Topics may include rock and roll culture, 
American road stories, and the movie industry’s influence on American culture. May be 
repeated for credit. Prerequisite(s): Junior level standing, honors students; non-honors 
students may take the course with permission of the instructor.
3230. THE ROLE AND POWER OF CULTURE
This is a study of culture, its components, and a critical examination of non-Western 
cultures for the purpose of comparative analysis with the United States.
3360. THE CREATIVE EXPERIENCE
An examination of the creative process, this course offers students the opportunity to 
examine their own creativity by investigating the needs and motivations of the human 
desire to create. Further, this course will give students an opportunity to engage in an 
aesthetic experience through personal contact with some aspect of medium, and to be 
able to objectify the notion about the nature of aesthetics, art, and creative work through 
study, experience and critical comparisons.
3370. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a 3000 level study of interdisciplinary topics. Content and focus will vary based 
on the topics in question and the disciplines implicated. As an upper-division course 
option, any topics option proposed should offer academic challenges that make it distinct 
from a lower-level topics course based on the characteristics associated with upper- v. 
lower-division coursework. This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course 
offerings. May be repeated when topics vary.
3371. MEDICAL HUMANITIES
Medical Humanities will be the common course required for the Minor in Medical 
Humanities. The course will introduce the historical legacy of Renaissance Humanism 
and its impact on scientific exploration. Students will explore applications of humanism 
and medical innovation in the context of modern clinical practice.
3372. REPRESENTING THE BODY
This course will examine literary and visual representations of ability, disability, beauty, 
repugnance, health, and illness and will incorporate an investigation of disability studies, 
bodily awareness theory, aesthetic medicine, and popular media. A studio component will 
synthesize course concepts.
4101. MOUNTAINEER LEADERSHIP ACADEMY-SENIOR (FALL)
This course is the Senior Fall semester common course requirement for the Mountaineer 
Leadership Academy. The course explores and reflects on the influence of a leader by 
giving back to the Mountaineer Leadership Academy. Students will apply their leadership 
skills through an established mentoring program where they will help lead different 
aspects of the leadership development of the students within the learning community. 

4170. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
4270. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
4340. PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS IN GLOBAL SOCIETY
A study of the major problems confronting the world today, this seminar uses the 
perspectives of different cultures as a means of better understanding both the origins of 
and potential solutions to these problems.
4370. TOPICS IN INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
This is a study of topics not otherwise covered in course offerings. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
4371. MEDICAL HUMANITIES IN HEALTH CARE
This course places the theories in context and will examine clinical and programmatic 
applications of medical humanities. 
4399. SENIOR PROJECT
Designed for B.A. students who are pursuing the general studies option and whose degree 
plan is interdisciplinary in nature. It includes independent capstone research investigation 
culminating in a senior thesis or comparable senior project.
MANAGEMENT (MGMT) 
2341. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
This course examines management as a process, profession and discipline. Emphasis 
will be placed on organizational design, management of innovation, strategic decision-
making, control systems, group dynamics, motivation, leadership and a survey of 
normative managerial literature. The course will strive to strike a balance between 
quantitative and qualitative management tools. 
3334. PRINCIPLES OF LEADERSHIP
This course is an introduction to the history and theory of leadership. Topics to be 
investigated include: critical thinking and methods of inquiry as they bear on the subject 
of leadership, the ethics of leadership, basic leadership competencies, relevant leadership 
contexts, and leading groups and individuals.
3335. PROJECT MANAGEMENT
This course provides foundation concepts and approaches to successfully manage 
projects: visioning, analysis, approval, planning, scheduling, controlling, resource 
allocation, performance measurement, and implementation. The approaches and tools 
could be applied for small to very large projects. The course includes risk mitigation and 
contingency planning: organized approaches for managing through the uncertainties that 
could negatively impact project cost, time frame, or results.
3336. PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT
This course will provide an understanding of that part of the economy that is controlled 
by government national, state, or local governments organizations. The United States is 
estimated to have 22 million civilian government employees. Students will understand 
the structure of government organizations, their roles and functions, and the processes 
they use to accomplish their tasks. The course will provide students with background to 
take, seek and accept professional positions in the government and will improve their 
effectiveness at making key decisions in public sector roles.
3337. SERVICES MANAGEMENT
This course focuses on management concepts and approaches specifically applicable 
to the service sector. The service sector is defined as those economic I value creating 
activities that do not produce a physical product. The service sector is the fastest growing 
areas of the US economy. This growth has fueled demand for skilled and effective 
managers. There will be five foundational concepts: 1) how services add economic value, 
2) the benefits of customer focus, and 3) management and relationship approaches that 
lead to success, 4) productivity I efficiency, and 5) application of information technology 
to services management.
3340. BORDERLESS BUSINESS
This is a study of international commerce with emphasis on the factors that drive 
globalization of business, impact on domestic corporations, and contemporary 
management strategies. Topics include integrity, international trade agreements, 
monetary transactions, technology-driven global marketing, cultural differences, and the 
roles of politics and economics. This is an online global flex course that incorporates 
contemporary international business topics and may include optional travel. 
Sophomore standing or above and BSAD 1301.
3350. ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
This course focuses on providing an integrated social scientific approach to relationships 
between the individual and the organization, and on administrative problems. Topics 
include performance appraisal, leadership, motivation, interpersonal relationships, 
decision-making, job satisfaction, and change. 
See PSYC 3350.
4330. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
This course focuses on human resource management with emphasis on its impact on the 
practice of management throughout the organization. Topics include equal employment 
opportunity and other legal issues, staffing, training and development, compensation, 
employee relations, and workplace related health and safety issues. 
4370. TOPICS IN MANAGEMENT
This is a study of selected topics in the field of business. Topics will vary; course may be 
repeated. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN MANAGEMENT
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the dean. 
and MGMT 2341. May be repeated as topics vary.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN MANAGEMENT
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student 
to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. 
approved internship application.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN MANAGEMENT
This is an independent research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or comparable 
senior project. 
5303. MANAGEMENT STATISTICS
This MBA course explores the process of asking business-related research questions and 
finding answers. It includes a broad overview of experimental and non-experimental 
methods of fact finding and emphasizing the functional use and understanding of basic 
descriptive and inferential statistics in evaluating practical business research findings. 
Practical business applications will include: the mathematics associated with finance, 
production and logistical decision-making, and using probability distributions and 
statistics. 
5304. QUANTITATIVE DECISION-MAKING
This course is designed to provide students with advanced quantitative decision-making 
processes. Students will learn to solve: production, advertising, financial, marketing, 
resource organizational, and ordering problems utilizing computer modeling techniques. 
This course will be assessed with the MBA Major Field Exam. 
to MBA program.
5321. LEADERSHIP AND TEAM BUILDING
This course focuses on the significance of understanding the diversity of behaviors 
employed by employees in interpreting and responding to business dilemmas; 
specifically, the complexity of organizational problems in team environments. Successful 
firms are the ones that anticipate change and establish competitive advantages through 
collaborative teams and the use of organizational alliances and strategic partnerships. 
Topics include ethics, team building, power of vision, empowerment, delegation, 
performance management, quality, and the art of persuasion. 
MBA program.
5322. LEADERSHIP COMMUNICATION
This course focuses on developing the communication capabilities needed to lead 
organizations effectively. Managerial communication and the concepts of emotional 
intelligence are married to create a leadership communication model. Students learn the 
art of creating persuasive communications and how to change the behavior of others for 
a more successful campaign. 
5323. ADVANCED ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
This course investigates the complex role of the manager within the context of the social 
scientific relationships and theory related to the individual within the organization. Topics 
of discussion include: leadership, power, communication, interpersonal relationships, 
job satisfaction, change, motivation and decision-making. 
MBA program.
5341. MANAGEMENT RESEARCH IN BUSINESS
This MBA course is a study of research design and data collection as well as data 
analysis and reporting, linking quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods research 
design techniques. Course includes advanced research methods, statistical techniques, 
and computer-aided analysis of quantitative and qualitative data. Ethics and integrity 
in management research is incorporated throughout the course. This course includes a 
research proposal design practicum that will prepare students to conduct professional 
business research. 
2340. PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING
This is a basic course using the managerial approach to the study of marketing and 
includes a study of consumer behavior, product strategy, the selection of distribution 
channels, pricing, and promotion. Emphasis is on the creation of effective marketing 
strategies. 
3310. ELECTRONIC BUSINESS
This course focuses on the linkage between organizational strategy and networked 
information technologies to implement business models. This course provides an 
introduction to e-business strategy and the development and web pages for e-business 
solutions.
3321. ADVERTISING
This is a study viewed from both a marketing and communication perspective as any 
paid form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods, and services by 
an identified sponsor. Included is how the advertiser performs the function of using the 
means available to inform prospective buyers of the product or service. 
3322. INTERNATIONAL MARKETING
This is a study of the growth in world markets, cultural differences, and political constraints 
applicable to international marketing. Students are introduced to activities involving the 
gathering and analyzing of information in the development and implementation of an 
international marketing plan. This is a global flex course and may include optional travel. 

3323. MARKETING MANAGEMENT
This course focuses on the decision-making role of the marketing manager who is 
responsible for formulating the strategic marketing plan. The theory of selecting market 
target(s) for the firm’s product and/or services and the development of the marketing mix 
(product, price, promotion, distribution) with the aid of market research and computerized 
information systems is covered. The skills objectives include the continued development 
of student written and oral communication skills, the continued development of student 
group interaction and decision-making skills, and to develop student ability to apply and 
synthesize course content in project work. 
4170. TOPICS IN MARKETING
This is a study of selected topics in the field of business. Topics will vary. Course may be 
repeated when topics vary. 
4270. TOPICS IN BUSINESS
This is a study of selected topics in the field of business. Topics will vary. Courses may 
be repeated when topics vary. 
4322. PROFESSIONAL SELLING
This course is a study of the different approaches and techniques of personal selling. 
Specifically students will be exposed to prospecting, approaching the customer, 
determining customer needs versus wants, sales presentation, overcoming objections, 
and closing the sale. In addition, students examine the methods and principles of sales 
management. 
4323. PURCHASING AND SUPPLY-CHAIN MANAGEMENT
This course focuses on the strategic role of purchasing and supply management. The 
competitive strength of the technology intensive firm is, today, decided by the ability to 
deliver customized products and services worldwide in a fast and cost-effective way. The 
competition is, therefore, no longer between individual firms, but between value chains. 
This means that a company’s ability to compete is dependent on the weaknesses and 
strengths of their customers and suppliers. The demand for integration and cooperation 
between different actors will therefore be even more accentuated, and the aim of this 
course is to show how resources and activities can be coordinated all through the value-
chain for increased effectiveness. 
4324. BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
This is an introductory course on the topic of Business Intelligence (BI). The student will 
acquire knowledge and skills to understand the value of BI for an organization, design 
and develop information systems that will capture relevant data from all segments of an 
enterprise, organize that data into a coherent structure, and provide the means to analyze 
the data in order to make rational decisions. Specific topics include data warehousing, 
data mining, text and web mining, and reality mining. Students will study real life cases 
and be exposed to business analytics and business performance management, and the 
business data user interface. 
4332. RETAIL MANAGEMENT
This is a study of the management practices typically employed in selling the retail 
enterprises. The basic functions of merchandising, promotion, supply-chain, control, and 
other activities involved in the sale of services and goods to consumers are examined 
from an operational perspective. 
ACCT 2301, and ACCT 2302.
4370. TOPICS IN MARKETING
This is a study of selected topics in the field of business. Topics will vary; course may be 
repeated. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN MARKETING
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the dean. 
and MKTG 2340. May be repeated as topics vary.
4398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN MARKETING
This is supervised field employment which provides the opportunity for the student 
to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. 
approved internship application.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN MARKETING
This is an independent research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or comparable 
senior project. 
5311. BORDERLESS MARKETING
The international marketing environment can be more challenging for businesses by 
requiring firms to identify the opportunities and threats emerging from diverse cultural, 
economic, demographic, political/legal, and competitive environments. This course 
will focus on strategies, methods, and best practices managers employ to select foreign 
country market(s) to enter and the Foreign Market Entry Modes (FMEM). This includes: 
exporting; licensing and franchising; contractual agreements; joint ventures; wholly 
owned subsidiaries; and strategic alliances. The course will focus on the managerial 
decision analysis needed to choose amongst these alternative foreign market entry modes 
and develop strategies to be successful in international marketing. The market entry 
mode adopted will have a major impact on the costs, risks, and return associated with 
international expansion and overall performance. Emphasis will also be placed on the 
international marketing manager’s ability to develop, execute and effectively manage the 
marketing mix program in complex international environments. 
to MBA program and completion of Foundation course(s), if required.
MATHEMATICS (MATH)
Schreiner University offers courses leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree and the 
Bachelor of Science degree with a major in Mathematics. The Mathematics program is 
designed for those students who wish to pursue a career in business or in education. It 
also builds a solid foundation for advanced study in Mathematics. Students who wish to 
become teachers can use the required professional education courses as electives in the 
prescribed program.
French or German is recommended as foreign language. 
The major in Mathematics consists of 25 advanced hours.
For the B.A. degree: 
MATH 2330, 2340, 2422, 2423, 3310, 3312, 3313, 3324, 3336, 3425, and 4393, plus 9 
advanced hours. PHYS recommended as electives.
For the B.S. degree: 
MATH 2330, 2340, 2422, 2423, 3310, 3312, 3313, 3324, 3336, 3425, and 4393, plus 
PHYS 2425, 2426, CIT 2410.
Students completing MATH 1321 at Schreiner University with a grade of ‘‘C” or better 
will, upon written request to the Registrar, be given credit for MATH 1310 or 1311. 
Students completing either MATH 2422 or a more advanced mathematics course with a 
grade of ‘‘C” or better or AP credit will, upon written request to the Registrar, be given 
credit for MATH 1310 or 1311 and MATH 1321. Students completing MATH 2423 
at Schreiner University with a grade of “C” or better will, upon written request to the 
Registrar, be given credit for MATH 2422.
Students who plan to major in Mathematics, Chemistry, or Engineering should enroll in 
MATH 2422 and MATH 2423 if their background in mathematics is sufficiently good. 
If not, they should enroll in MATH 1310 or MATH 1321 first. Students majoring in 
Business Administration should enroll in MATH 1311.
Students seeking teacher certification in mathematics should consult the Teacher 
Education section of this catalog for specific course selection.
Placement in mathematics courses is based on mathematics placement assessment.
0303. ALGEBRA REVIEW
This is a review of high school algebra, including problem solving with real numbers, 
linear and quadratic equations, fractions and graphing, polynomials, factoring, exponents, 
and radicals. 
course does not satisfy degree requirements.
1302. COLLEGE MATHEMATICS
This includes problem solving with practical applications of mathematics in personal 
finance, geometry, probability, statistics, mathematical modeling, and graphing. The use 
of technology, communication in mathematics, and the role of mathematics in modern 
culture are investigated. 
credit, placement or test score or consent of the instructor.
1310. (1314) COLLEGE ALGEBRA
This course is the study of polynomial, radical, rational, logarithmic, and exponential 
functions with applications, data analysis; systems of equations, and matrices. 

score or consent of the instructor.
1311. (1324) MATH CONCEPTS FOR BUSINESS
This course is the study of key concepts from College Algebra with a focus on concepts 
necessary for business majors to be successful. Specific topics will include the student of 
polynomial, radical, rational, logarithmic, and exponential functions with applications; 
business type word problems; mathematics of finance; an introduction to combinatorics, 
probability, and statistics. 
credit, placement, or test score, or consent of the instructor.
1321. (2312) PRECALCULUS
This is a study of analytic geometry and trigonometry, elementary functions, their graphs 
and applications including algebraic, polynomial, and rational functions, trigonometric, 
exponential, and logarithmic functions; conic sections; complex numbers. 
of the instructor.
2170. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is a study of selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary; course 
may be repeated when topics vary. May not be applied toward mathematics or science 
requirement. 
2270. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is a study of selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary; course 
may be repeated when topics vary. May not be applied toward mathematics or science 
requirement. 
2330. APPLIED STATISTICS
Studied are design of experiments, descriptive statistics, correlation and regression, 
probability, estimation and inference, test of hypothesis and significance, chance models, 
analysis of variance. This course is designed for students preparing for careers in 
business, the natural sciences and social sciences, or for teaching with a specialization 
in mathematics. 
placement, or test score, or consent of the instructor.
2340. INTRODUCTION TO PROOFS
This course will provide an introduction to formal mathematical proofs. Topics will 
include logic, truth tables, mathematical induction and common proof techniques. The 
application area where these techniques will be applied will vary. 
1310 or equivalent course credit.
2370. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is a study of selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary; course may 
be repeated when topics vary. 
2422. (2413) CALCULUS I
This is a thorough introduction to the theory and applications of differential and integral 
calculus. Topics include functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, the Mean Value 
Theorem, applications of derivatives, integrals, numerical integration, integral methods, 
and the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Recommended for students who plan to major 
in mathematics, engineering, physics, chemistry, and premedical programs. 
score, or consent of the instructor.
2423. (2414) CALCULUS II
Topics include techniques of integration, differential equations, applications of integrals, 
sequences, infinite series, parametric equations, polar notation, vector algebra, and solid 
analytic geometry. 
3305. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS
This is a survey of mathematical concepts including, but not limited to, algebra, geometry, 
trigonometry, graph theory, analytic geometry, series, sequences, calculus, linear algebra 
and abstract algebra. This course is required of all middle school mathematics education 
majors and is recommended for secondary education majors in mathematics. May not 
be used to satisfy major upper division credit requirements. 
advanced mathematics and department approval.
3310. INTRODUCTION TO REAL ANALYSIS
This course is a study of the real number system, sequences, series, limits, derivatives and 
integrals of real-valued functions; set theory, logic and techniques of proof. 
MATH 2423 and MATH 2340.
3312. LINEAR ALGEBRA
This is a study of abstract notions of linear algebra including vector spaces and linear 
transformations and the applications of these concepts using matrices and determinants. 

3313. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA
This includes fundamental concepts of abstract algebra; Groups, Rings, and Fields with 
the emphasis on Groups are the main focus. 
3324. CALCULUS III
Topics include vector algebra and solid analytic geometry, calculus of several variables, 
multiple integration and applications, Jacobians, vector fields, line and surface integrals, 
and Green’s and Stokes’ Theorems. 
3333. PROBABILITY
This is a course in the mathematical theory of probability. Includes sample spaces, relative 
frequency, discrete and continuous random variables of one and higher dimensions, 
expected value, variance, correlation and regression, distributions, reliability theory, 
sums of random variables, sampling, estimation of parameters, and testing of hypothesis. 

3336. MODERN GEOMETRY
This is a study of historical development, sets and propositions, coordinate geometry, 
congruences, the complex plane, constructions, postulational systems, postulates for the 
Euclidean Plane, and postulates for the Non-Euclidean Plane. 
MATH 2422 or equivalent or consent of instructor.
3425. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
This involves theory, solutions and application of ordinary differential equations with 
introduction to Laplace transforms and partial differential equations. Topics include 
first order linear and non-linear equations, linear equations with constant coefficients, 
nth-order initial value problems, variation of parameters, infinite series solutions and 
systems of differential equations using matrices. Computer solutions are incorporated 
into classwork and homework (3-2). 
4170. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary; course may be 
repeated when topics vary. 
4270. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary; course may be 
repeated when topics vary. 
4321. COMPLEX VARIABLES
This is a study of the fundamentals of differentiation and integration theory of complex 
variables. 
MATH 2340.
4326. INTRODUCTION TO NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
Interpolation; approximations; numerical integration and differentiation; roots of 
polynomial equations; numerical linear algebra; solution of ordinary differential 
equations; computer applications when appropriate are studied in this course. 
4334. INTRODUCTION TO TOPOLOGY
This course is an introductory course to topology, a study of topological spaces. It is 
intended to expose a student to the basics of point-set topology. Prerequisites (if any): 
MATH 2340 and MATH 2423 or consent of instructor.
4370. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
This is selected topics in the field of mathematics. Topics will vary but may include 
number theory, real analysis, topology, algebra and logic. Course may be repeated when 
topics vary. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN MATHEMATICS – R
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
4393. CAPSTONE IN MATHEMATICS
This capstone course in mathematics focuses on an in-depth study of undergraduate 
mathematics including calculus, geometry, algebra, statistics, differential equations, and 
real analysis. The student is challenged to exhibit significant knowledge and understanding 
from all previous mathematics coursework. During this semester the student will prepare 
a written notebook, and complete the Mathematics Major Field Exam and the Oral 
Examination. Prerequisite(s): MATH 2330, 2331, 3312, 3313, 3324, 3425, and 3310, or 
consent of instructor.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN MATHEMATICS – R
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project.
MILITARY SCIENCE (MILT)
1201.  INTRODUCTION TO THE ARMY  
AND CRITICAL THINKING
This course introduces students to the personal challenges and competencies that are 
critical for effective leadership and communication. Students will learn how the personal 
development of life skills such as cultural understanding, goal setting, time management, 
stress management, and comprehensive fitness relate to leadership, officership, and the 
Army profession. As students become further acquainted with MILT 1201, they will learn 
the structure of the ROTC Basic Course program track; Fall and Spring Leadership Labs; 
and CIET. The course focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of 
Army leadership dimensions, attributes and core leader competencies while gaining an 
understanding of the ROTC program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the 
student. This course has an integrated lab requirement.
1202. INTRODUCTION TO THE PROFESSION OF ARMS
This course introduces students to the professional challenges and competencies that 
are needed for effective execution of the profession of arms and Army communication. 
Through this course, students will learn how Army ethics and values shape the U.S. 
Army and the specific ways that these ethics are inculcated into U.S. Army culture. 
This course will explore the Seven Army Values and the Warrior Ethos; investigate the 
Profession of Arms and Army leadership as well as an overview of the U.S. Army; gain 
practical experience using critical communication skills. This course has an integrated 
lab requirement.
MUSIC (MUSC)
1102. UNIVERSITY CHOIR
This is singing in the primary campus choral ensemble. It will include training in voice 
production and musicianship. Three to four hours of rehearsal weekly. May be repeated 
for credit. 
1104. APPLIED MUSIC: VOICE
This is private instruction in voice. One thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is 
expected to practice at least 6 hours per week. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee 
to be assessed.
1105. APPLIED MUSIC: PIANO
This is private instruction in piano. One thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is 
expected to practice at least 6 hours per week. May be repeated for credit. 
1106. APPLIED MUSIC: ORGAN
This is private instruction in organ. One thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is 
expected to practice at least 6 hours per week. May be repeated for credit. 
instructor. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
1107. APPLIED MUSIC: GUITAR
This is private instruction in guitar. One thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is 
expected to practice at least 6 hours per week. 
repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
1108. APPLIED MUSIC: HARP
This is private instruction in harp. One thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is expected 
to practice at least 6 hours per week. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to 
be assessed.
1109. APPLIED MUSIC: ORCHESTRAL INSTRUMENT
This is private instruction in an orchestral instrument. One thirty-minute lesson per week. 
Student is expected to practice at least 6 hours per week. May be repeated for credit. 
Laboratory fee to be assessed.
1113. STRING ORCHESTRA
The String Orchestra provides rehearsal, practice, and performance opportunities of 
musical masterworks and modern string repertoire, including alternative styles. The 
course will include training in string techniques, musicianship, and ensemble performance 
skills through an on-campus performance series. The String Orchestra will also represent 
Schreiner University on recruiting trips and will perform at local and area events to 
promote the University and the Department of Music. The String Orchestra meets for 
three hours of rehearsal weekly. May be repeated for credit. 
Schreiner University students by audition.
1170. TOPICS IN MUSIC
This is a beginning level study of a variety of topics in music. May be repeated when 
topics vary.
1201. VOICE CLASS FOR BEGINNERS
This course includes basic vocal training, breathing techniques, posture, learning songs, 
listening, and appreciating various vocal styles.
1203. PIANO FUNDAMENTALS
This course includes playing from treble and bass clefs, keyboard harmony, technical 
rudiments, simple two-hand pieces.
1205. GUITAR CLASS FOR BEGINNERS
Beginning Group Guitar introduces primary and fundamental guitar skills presented 
in a group setting. The course provides a comprehensive understanding and utilization 
of proper guitar technique, music reading, tablature, and improvisation skills. Students 
will be introduced to various styles and types of guitar music and will prepare musical 
compositions and exercises to be performed at the end of the semester. 
available for rent from dept.
1208. MARIACHI ENSEMBLE
The purpose of this course is to focus on the traditional music of the mariachi as it developed 
in post-Revolutionary urban Mexico. Genres include the son jalisciense, cancion ranchera, 
corrido, huapango, bolero, polka, joropo, pasodaoble, and vals mexicano.
1210. SIGHT-SINGING AND EAR TRAINING I
Sight-Singing and Ear Training I will cover singing materials and various rhythms found 
in music. Students will develop sight-singing skills of melodies, learn melodic and 
rhythmic dictation, and develop interval identification of melodic and harmonic intervals.
1211. SIGHT-SINGING AND EAR TRAINING II
Sight-Singing and Ear Training II will cover singing melodies and rhythms, including 
melodies with chromatic alterations, compound meters, less familiar metric groupings, 
and ear training covering all melodic and harmonic intervals; plus, ear training of various 
scale-types such as major, natural, harmonic, and melodic minor, dorian, phrygian, 
lydian, mixolydian, and Locrian modes. 
1303. INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC
This is an introduction to the art of musical understanding. Topics include musical 
elements, musical styles and periods, composers and their works, and musical forms. 
Emphasis will be upon music of Western Civilization. Students will be required to listen 
to music outside class time in addition to that played during class.
1304. MUSIC THEORY I
This course is a study of the elements of pitch, elements of rhythm, introduction to triads 
and seventh chords, and diatonic chords in major and minor keys.
1305. MUSIC THEORY II
This course is a study of the principles of voice leading, root position part writing, 
harmonic progression, triads in first inversion, triads in second inversion, and non-chord 
tones. 
2102. CONCERT CHOIR
This is an advanced level choir that will focus on advanced level voice training and on 
a cappella singing, foreign languages and varying styles of music from renaissance to 
classical to modern jazz. This ensemble will represent Schreiner University on recruiting 
trips and sing at local area events to promote the university and music department. This 
ensemble will also include advanced training in voice production and musicianship. 
There will be 3 to 4 hours rehearsal per week. May be repeated for credit. 
Audition, must be able to sight read at an intermediate to advanced level, and have 
previous choral experience.
2103. UNIVERSITY CONCERT BAND
This course entails rehearsal, practice and study of instrumental band repertoire, and 
performing in the primary campus band. It will include training in instrumental 
techniques and musicianship. This ensemble will represent Schreiner University 
on student recruitment trips and perform at local area events in order to promote the 
University and the Department of Music. Three hours of weekly rehearsal is required; 
may be repeated for credit. 
on a band instrument is necessary.
2105. APPLIED MUSIC: PIANO PROFICIENCY
This is private instruction in piano for non-piano majors. This course will be tailored to 
prepare the student to pass the piano proficiency examination. One, thirty-minute lesson 
per week. Student is expected to practice at least six hours per week. 
1105 or consent of instructor.
2106. JAZZ BAND
The Jazz Band will meet twice a week for rehearsal. Students will be exposed to 
fundamental performance skills and techniques as they apply in jazz, Latin, pop, and big 
band music. This ensemble will perform at University functions as well as community 
events to develop and promote the Schreiner Music department.
2107. STRING CHAMBER ENSEMBLE
The String Chamber Ensemble provides an intensive study of the string quartet and 
trio repertoire, including masterworks by Baroque, Classical and Modern composers. 
Training and development of individual student leadership in the string quartet/trio is 
crucial to a successful chamber ensemble experience. Students will be coached by a 
string instructor and guest artists. The quartet/trio will perform on an off campus for 
Schreiner University events, community performances and recruiting tours. The String 
Quartet/Trio will meet for two hours once a week. May be repeated for credit. Open to all 
Schreiner University students by audition.
2114. BRASS ENSEMBLE
This course involves the study and performance of music composed of arranged for brass 
ensemble or other brass chamber ensembles.
2124. LESSONS: VOICE
This is the individual instruction in VOICE on an advanced level. One sixty-minute 
lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
2125. LESSONS: PIANO
This is the individual instruction in PIANO on an advanced level. One sixty-minute 
lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
2126. LESSONS: ORGAN
This is individual instruction in ORGAN on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson 
per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. Student is expected 
to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
2127. LESSONS: GUITAR
This is individual instruction in GUITAR on an advanced level. One sixty-minute 
lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
2128. LESSONS: HARP
This is individual instruction in HARP on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
2129. LESSONS: ORCHESTRAL INSTRUMENTS
This is individual instruction in ORCHESTRAL INSTRUMENTS on an advanced level. 
One sixty-minute lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per 
week. 
to be assessed.
2305. INTRODUCTION TO THE MUSIC BUSINESS
This course will provide a survey of the music industry, highlighting areas where music 
and business intersect. The focus will be on career possibilities in the music industry, the 
development of business-related knowledge and skills necessary tor effectively maintain 
a professional music career, the vocabulary and terminology of the music industry, and 
the distinction between music and business at the corporate level. 
2370. TOPICS IN MUSIC
This is in-depth study of variety of topics in music. May be repeated when topics vary.
3103. SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA
Symphony of the Hills is a professional symphonic orchestra performing a five-concert 
season each year at the Cailloux Theater in Kerrville, Texas. The symphony provides the 
opportunity for advanced level Schreiner University string, woodwind, brass, percussion, 
and harp students to join with professional musicians in rehearsals and concerts of 
outstanding orchestral repertoire with acclaimed guest artists. The symphony rehearses 
one evening a week for three hours. May be repeated for credit. 
advanced Schreiner University students by audition. Concurrent enrollment with MUSC 
1113 String Orchestra.
3104. ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC: VOICE
This is individual instruction in voice on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3105. ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC: PIANO
This is individual instruction in piano on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3106. ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC: ORGAN
This is individual instruction in organ on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3107. ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC: GUITAR
This is individual instruction in guitar on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3108. ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC: HARP
This is individual instruction in harp on an advanced level. One sixty-minute lesson per 
week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours per week. 
with instructor. May be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3109.  ADVANCED APPLIED MUSIC:  
ORCHESTRAL INSTRUMENTS
This is individual instruction in an orchestral instrument, other than harp, on an advanced 
level. One, sixty-minute lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least 10 hours 
per week. 
be repeated for credit. Laboratory fee to be assessed.
3203. INSTRUMENTAL METHODS – PERCUSSION
Instrumental Methods – Percussion covers the basic learning of, and how to teach each 
of the percussion instruments – tympani, marimba, snare drum, bells, cymbals, and a 
wide array of instruments in the percussion family. The study of various concepts and 
pedagogy methods will be investigated along with basic instrumental maintenance and 
repair. 
3204. INSTRUMENTAL METHODS – WOODWINDS
Instrumental Methods – Woodwinds covers the basic learning of, and how to teach 
each of the wood-wind instruments – clarinet, flute, oboe, bassoon, and piccolo. The 
study of various concepts and pedagogy methods will be investigated along with basic 
instrumental maintenance and repair. 
3205. INSTRUMENTAL METHODS – BRASS
Instrumental Methods – Brass covers the basic learning of, and how to teach each of 
the brass instruments – trumpet, trombone, French horn, and tuba. The study of various 
concepts and pedgogy methods will be investigated along with basic instrumental 
maintenance and repair. 
3206. INSTRUMENTAL METHODS – STRINGS
This course includes the basic learning, and how to teach of the orchestral string 
instruments – violin, viola, cello, and double bass; basic instrumental maintenance and 
repair, and the study of various concept books and pedagogy methods. 
3207. ENSEMBLE PEDAGOGY TECHNIQUES
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental principles of effective 
instrumental music instruction and to provide opportunities for students to practice 
applying those principles in their own teaching. The ultimate goal of the course is that 
the student will acquire a basic understanding of the fundamental principles of music 
instruction discipline, a realistic perspective of students own strengths and weaknesses as 
developing professionals. The course will stimulate thinking concerning the role of music 
and music instruction in the lives of all children and the responsibilities of teachers in 
setting and accomplishing appropriate instructional goals.
3208. CHORAL PERFORMANCE LITERATURE
This course presents an overview of all levels of choir repertoire ranging from beginning 
choirs to professional-level works. Literature will be researched and presented to provide 
students will general information as well as practical suggestions on the inherent challenges 
unique to each piece. This course will also focus on the evolution and development 
of choir repertoire from its inception to the present, including historical significance. 
Additional topics will include the establishment of the criteria that determine artistic 
merit and how to effectively program for choirs at various ability levels. 
3209. INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMANCE LITERATURE
This course presents an overview of all levels of band and orchestral repertoire ranging 
from beginning band to professional-level works. Literature will be researched and 
presented to provide students with general information as well as practical suggestions on 
the inherent challenges unique to each piece. This course will also focus on the evolution 
and development of the wind band and orchestral repertoire from its inception to the 
present, including historical significance. Additional topics will include the establishment 
of the criteria that determine artistic merit and how to effectively program for bands and 
orchestras at various ability levels. 
3301. HISTORY OF WESTERN MUSIC TO 1This is a study of styles, techniques, and composers of music of Western civilizations 
from the Middle Ages through the Baroque. 
instructor.
3302. HISTORY OF WESTERN MUSIC SINCE 1This is a study of styles, techniques and composers of music of Western civilizations 
from the beginnings of styles following the Baroque until the present. 
hours music or consent of instructor.
3303. HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF SACRED MUSIC
This is a study of the development of the various service formats of the Christian church, 
the types of music developed for them and its relationship to secular music, and the 
practical use of different styles of music in worship today. 
consent of instructor. See RELI 3303.
3304. ELEMENTARY MUSIC PEDAGOGY
This courses serves as a portion of the professional knowledge base of the music education 
program at this university. Comprehensive study of children’s musical literature, skill 
development, and pedagogical approaches for music teaching at the primary level. 
Techniques derived from Orff Schulwerk, Kodály Concept, Dalcroze Eurgythmics, and 
world music pedagogies. Experiences with classroom instrument techniques, working 
with students with individual learning differences, and classroom technology are included.
3305. INTRODUCTION TO CONDUCTING AND SCORE STUDY
This is the study and practice of conducting patterns for regular and irregular beat 
patterns, subdivisions, and compound meters and of expressive gestures. Analysis of 
rehearsal and conducting techniques for representative instrumental and choral works. 
Practice conducting with campus groups. 
nine credit hours in music.
3306. VOCAL PEDAGOGY
This course is a study of vocal techniques. Vocal acoustics, breathing, and laryngeal 
function are also studied. Teaching strategies and philosophies, diagnosis of vocal 
problems, vocal repertoire, and ethics for teachers will be examined. Students also 
gain practical, supervised experience in teaching by working with a volunteer student 
as a course project. The course also includes periodic examinations. 
3307. MUSIC THEORY III
Music Theory III offers a thorough introduction to the resources and practice of 
Western music from the seventeenth century to the present day. A general list of the 
musical elements to be studied includes (1) Voice leading of diatonic seventh chords; (2) 
Secondary dominance and leading tone chords; (3) Mode mixture; (4) Neapolitan chords; 
and (5) Augmented 6th chords. 
3308. WORLD MUSIC
The World Music course aims to equip students with practical and intellectual tools to 
enhance their enjoyment and understanding of popular, folk and classical music traditions 
around the globe, (with the exclusion of what are commonly referred to as Western Art 
and popular Music) and to explore how these traditions related to history, social issues, 
politics and identity. By the end of the semester, students will be able to recognize and 
appreciate a wide variety of World Music, and be able to articulate, through writing 
projects, knowledge of specific genres and artists of their choosing. 
3370. TOPICS IN MUSIC
This is in-depth study of variety of topics in music. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4105. KEYBOARD HARMONY AND MUSICAL SKILLS
This course is private instruction in piano, for piano and organ majors. It will be tailored 
to prepare the student to pass the keyboard harmony and musical skills examination. One, 
thirty-minute lesson per week. Student is expected to practice at least six hours per week. 

4320. MUSICAL FORM AND ANALYSIS
Musical Form refers to ways in which a composition is shaped to create a meaningful 
musical experience for the listener. Form and Analysis makes reference to the design of 
a musical composition and to its tonal structure. 
4370. TOPICS IN MUSIC
This is in-depth study of particular topics in music. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4399. SENIOR PROJECT/RECITAL IN MUSIC
This is the senior capstone course that includes preparation and presentation of a public 
recital of approximately one hour in length in the student’s principal applied music area. 
During the same semester, student will prepare a written document of some musical 
elements of works performed. In the case of a student whose principal field of emphasis 
is composition or theory, the recital would be of his or her works, though not necessarily 
performed by the composer. 
including at least 3 hours of advanced applied music.
NURSING (NURS)
3204. FOUNDATIONS OF PROFESSIONAL NURSING CLINICAL
This course is an introduction to the philosophy and theory of nursing; nursing history 
and professional organizations; patient assessment, the nursing process; critical thinking 
and clinical judgment. The student will develop the foundation for providing direct 
patient care through development and practice of skills in communication, assessment, 
vital signs, activities of daily living, and related technical nursing skills needed to meet 
the patient needs of the adult experiencing health problems in a compassionate, ethical, 
and safe manner within a variety of settings.
3205. CARE OF ADULT I CLINICAL
This course focuses on advancing the students ability to use critical thinking in applying 
theoretical principles and requisite knowledge and skills to function more independently 
in application of the nursing process directed at health restoration, health promotion, and 
health maintenance for the adult experiencing low to moderate health conditions within 
the healthcare setting.
3206. NURSING CARE OF THE PEDIATRIC PATIENT
This course focuses on the holistic care of children and families using clinical decision 
making to care for culturally diverse parent-child families. The course provides students 
with the opportunity to examine the role of the professional nurse in providing care to 
the parent-child family based on standards and best practices. Theories and evidenced-
based practices are used to guide nursing assessment, health promotion, maintenance, 
restoration, risk reduction, and teaching of the parent-child family experiencing multiple 
health states across environments.
3207. NURSING CARE OF THE PEDIATRIC PATIENT CLINICAL
This course focuses on effective application of knowledge, skills and attitudes of the 
professional nurse in applying nursing principles in caring for culturally and socially 
diverse children and families. The student will demonstrate clinical reasoning with 
evidence-based practice (EBP), in application of the nursing process directed at health 
maintenance, restoration, risk reduction and teaching of children and families.
3208. NURSING CARE OF THE ADULT II CLINICAL
This course focuses on effective application of knowledge, skills and attitudes of the 
professional nurse in applying nursing principles using holistic patient-centered care for 
diverse adults within various settings. The student will demonstrate proficiency in using 
clinical reasoning and evidence-based practice information (EBP), in application of the 
nursing process directed at health restoration, health promotion, and health maintenance, 
for the adult with multiple chronic health conditions. 
Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology and 
Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the Adult I Clinical.
3304. FOUNDATIONS OF PROFESSIONAL NURSING
This course is an introduction to the philosophy and theory of nursing; nursing history 
and professional organizations; patient assessment, the nursing process; critical thinking 
and clinical judgment. The student will develop the foundation for providing direct 
patient care through skills in communication, assessment, vital signs, activities of daily 
living, and providing for patient safety, and related technical nursing skills needed to 
meet patient needs.
3305. NURSING THEORY AND RESEARCH
This course is an introduction to theories of nursing, the role of research in professional 
nursing practice, and the responsibilities of professional nurses in finding, critiquing 
and applying research in professional practice. 
Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology and 
Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the Adult I Clinical.
3306. PHARMACOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
This course focuses on the major classifications of pharmacology with emphasis on 
pharmacotherapeutic actions, related pathophysiology, and clinical applications for 
patient across the lifespan. The course includes legal, ethical, and regulatory parameters 
related to medication administration.
3307. NURSING RESEARCH
This course continues with an introduction to theories of nursing, the role of research in 
professional nursing practice, and the responsibilities of professional nurses in finding, 
critiquing and applying research in professional practice. There is the addition of a 
quantitative research proposal and a qualitative paper.
3308. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
This course covers basic concepts related to the abnormal function and change in various 
organ systems in the face of disease. Effects of disease and other pathological agents 
are of primary concern, rather than the biology of the agents themselves. We will study 
the fundamental changes in body physiology due to disease. Considerations are given 
to selected pathological alterations and their effects on physiological and psychological 
functions. Emphasis is put on selected illnesses most often encountered by health 
professionals with emphasis placed on disease processes, manifestations, and treatment. 
Focus is on presentation of selected pathophysiology and subsequent symptomatology 
in diverse clients across the lifespan. Common diseases and disorders are covered and 
emphasis is given to cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, renal and reproductive systems.
3309. TRANSITION TO PROFESSIONAL NURSING
The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to professional nursing and the 
role of the professional nurse in customizing the promotion and maintenance of health 
to individuals through culturally sensitive competent patient centered care. Course 
content includes advocacy, safety, the multidisciplinary team, the nature and history of 
professionalism and processes underlying professional nursing, basic concepts of health 
and illness and legal issues in nursing practice. There will be the addition of the discussion 
of Nursing Theory and its implication for patient care.
3405. CARE OF ADULT I
This course focuses on application of theoretical principles regarding holistic care of 
the diverse adult within various settings who are experiencing health problems of low to 
moderate severity. The ANA Standards of Care and the ANA Code of Ethics provide the 
framework for this nursing care.
3408. NURSING CARE OF THE ADULT II
This course focuses on the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of 
patient-centered holistic nursing care for adults with chronic health conditions. Emphasis 
is placed on increasing the learner’s conceptual knowledge base and independent 
functioning in the adult clinical setting, application of the nursing process and critical 
thinking with evidence-based practice (EBP) and theories in providing care directed at 
health restoration, health promotion, and health maintenance, for the young, middle, 
and older adult. 
Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the 
Adult Clinical.
3411. POPULATION AND NURSING LEADERSHIP 
Students will apply client-centered, culturally appropriate concepts in the assessment, 
planning, delivery, and evaluation of evidence-based health care services for diverse 
individuals, families, and aggregate populations. Through direct and indirect nursing 
care components, students will use epidemiological, social, and environmental data to 
assess client and population health status. Client interventions are formulated to promote 
and preserve health. Interdisciplinary leadership and management concepts will be 
incorporated to guide improved outcomes for individuals within the community.
4103.  NURSING LEADERSHIP –  
MANAGE CLINICAL INSTRUCTION
This course focuses on proficient application of knowledge, skills, and attitudes of the 
professional nursing in applying skills in leadership and management, supervision, 
and delegation. The student will demonstrate proficient functioning in using clinical 
reasoning and evident-based practice (EBP) in application of the nursing process directed 
at health restoration, health promotion, and health maintenance, for multiple clients in 
organizational and community settings, or the management of staff for the delivery of 
effective care of clients.
4105. PHARMACOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS IN NURSING
The emphasis of this course is clinical pharmacotherapeutic applications in patient care. 
Students will use review, simulations and case studies to synthesize nursing program 
content related to pharmacotherapeutic applications, with an emphasis on safety and 
nursing standards. 
Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the 
Adult I, Nursing Care of the Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care 
of the Adult II Clinical, Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of 
the Pediatric Patient Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult III, Nursing Care of the Adult III 
Clinical, Maternal Child Nursing, Maternal Child Nursing Clinical, Behavioral Health, 
Behavioral Health Clinical.
4204. MATERNAL CHILD NURSING
This course focuses on the holistic nursing care of child-bearing women and their 
newborns in culturally diverse families. Students have the opportunity to examine the 
role of the professional nurse based on standards and best practices. Students learn to 
use theories and evidence-based practices to guide planning of nursing assessment, 
promoting health maintenance, restoration, risk reduction, and teaching of the mother 
and family experiencing pregnancy and child birth. 
Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology 
and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the Adult I Clinical, 
Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II Clinical, Research, Nursing 
Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient Clinical.
4205. MATERNAL CHILD NURSING CLINICAL
This course focuses on effective application of knowledge, skills and attitudes of the 
professional nurse in using nursing principles to provide holistic patient-centered care 
for the mother and family experiencing pregnancy and childbirth. The student will 
demonstrate proficiency using clinical reasoning with evidence-based practice (EBP), 
in application of the nursing process directed at health maintenance, restoration, risk 
reduction and teaching of the mother and family experiencing pregnancy and childbirth. 

Clinical, Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing 
Care of the Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II 
Clinical, Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric 
Patient Clinical.
4206. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NURSING CLINICAL
This course focuses on effective application of knowledge, skills and attitudes of the 
professional nurse in using nursing principles in caring for culturally and socially diverse 
persons with mental health concerns, and using treatment modalities, both preventive 
and therapeutic. The student will demonstrate clinical reasoning with evidence-based 
practice (EBP), in application of the nursing process directed at health maintenance, 
restoration, health promotion, and teaching of clients with mental health concerns. 

Clinical, Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing 
Care of the Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II 
Clinical, Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric 
Patient Clinical.
4207. NURSING CARE OF THE ADULT III CLINICAL
This course focuses on proficient application of knowledge, skills and attitudes of the 
professional nurse in applying nursing principles using holistic patient-centered care for 
diverse adults within various settings. The student will demonstrate advanced functioning 
using clinical reasoning with evidence-based practice (EBP), in application of the nursing 
process directed at health restoration, health promotion, and health maintenance, for the 
adult with complex multi-system health needs in the critical care setting. 
Foundations of Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, 
Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the 
Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II Clinical, 
Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient 
Clinical, Population Focused Health, Population Focused Health Clinical, Behavioral 
Health Nursing, Behavioral Health Nursing Clinical.
4302. HOLISTIC HEALTH CARE ACROSS THE LIFESPAN
This course is designed to enhance the working RN’s knowledge and skills with applying 
evidenced based practice for health promotion across the lifespan with an emphasis 
on vulnerable populations. This course will emphasis the family as a client, cultural 
diversity, teaching principle across the lifespan. Health promotion education will use 
evidence based research and will also focus on communication, community resources 
and screenings in a clinical setting.
4303. NURSING LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT
This course focuses on the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that provide a foundation for 
critical thinking and decision-making in leadership and management, supervision, and 
delegation. The course examines healthcare system policy, finance, regulation, analysis, 
and transformation of healthcare systems at department levels to improve the quality and 
safety of patient care. Leadership strategies and theories that promote effective, mutually 
respectful, ethical working relationships in organizational and community settings 
are emphasized.
4304. COMMUNITY HEALTH NURSING
This course focuses on holistic public health nursing care of populations in local, 
national, and global settings, emphasizing levels of prevention and health promotion 
based on determinants of health (policy-making, social factors, health services, individual 
behavior, and biology/genetics). This course incorporates a clinical component evaluating 
a community.
4306. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NURSING
This course focuses on behavioral health concepts related to mental illness prevention, 
health maintenance and healing applied to clients and families of all ages. An overview of 
the continuum of mental wellbeing and acute and chronic psychiatric/behavioral illness 
and treatment modalities is included, both preventive and therapeutic, as is cultural and 
social influences and perceptions related to mental illness. Analysis of professional roles 
provides a basis for application of the nursing process and therapeutic communication in 
the behavioral health setting, using a holistic health framework. 
of Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, Pharmacology 
and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the Adult I Clinical, 
Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II Clinical, Research, Nursing 
Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient Clinical.
4308. TRANSITION TO PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE
This course focuses on current nursing issues and preparation for, and assessment of, 
readiness to enter professional practice. Students will engage in activities intended to 
contribute to a successful job search, explore issues that may confront the profession 
of nursing or the individual nurse, and assess readiness for the NCLEX. 
Foundations of Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, 
Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the 
Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II Clinical, 
Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient 
Clinical, Population Focused Health, Population Focused Health Clinical, Maternal 
Child Nursing, Maternal Child Nursing Clinical, Behavioral Health, Behavioral Health 
Clinical.
4370. TOPICS IN NURSING
This is a study of selected topics in the field of nursing. Topics will vary; course may 
be repeated when topics vary. 
standing and admission to BSN program.
4371. HOLISTIC HEALTH ASSESSMENT ACROSS THE LIFESPAN
Health Assessment for the Experienced Nurse emphasizes the skills essential to the 
assessment parameter of the nursing process. The purpose of this course is to broaden 
the nurse’s knowledge base, increase their assessment skills with a holistic approach 
including mind, body, and spirit, and to facilitate their ability to apply these skills in a 
clinical setting. The knowledge from this course is immediately applicable to everyday 
patient care. Another focal point of the course is the evaluation and utilization of research 
and additional sources of information necessary to address patient needs and provide 
quality care. The course covers the appropriate methods, appraisal, and utilization of 
research findings with a goal of implementing best practices. Barriers to the use of 
evidence-based practice as well as how to facilitate innovation within the workplace are 
also discussed. This course will have a clinical component with students doing health 
assessments online and in a clinical setting.
4372. NURSING INFORMATICS
Nursing Informatics examines the history of healthcare informatics, basic concepts, 
current issues, as well as health information management systems. Students will apply 
informatics concepts to a current clinical practice setting and will suggest methods for 
using technology to improve patient safety and work place effectiveness. Acceptance into 
the RN to BSN program.
4373. POLITICS AND POLICY
This course will provide the RN-to-BSN student coursework that will assist in developing 
an understanding and the tools needed to comprehend how nursing policy and politics 
interact. Each student will develop the opportunities to apply knowledge from liberal 
arts and nursing theory in understanding the relationship between nursing policy and 
politics. Individuals will be evaluated through didactic assessments for their readiness in 
the comprehension of concepts. Acceptance into the RN to BSN program.
4374. GLOBAL HEALTH NURSING
This course explores global issues affecting personal, community, and international 
health and development using approaches from health promotion, population health, 
and primary health care to help frame analyses. Nursing students will learn about the 
basic perspectives on health policy issues in various geographical regions and the effects 
of significant world events. Global Health Nursing demonstrates how the nurse creates 
an environment of inclusion and demonstrates evidence-based, quality nursing care in 
complex situations as well as across health care systems and diverse settings. Acceptance 
into the RN to BSN program.
4375. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND NURSING
This course explores the economic issues relevant to nursing practice and health care 
and uses a systems approach to analyzing the financial impact of health care decisions. 
The course further assesses the financial implications of nursing decisions from a clinical 
perspective. Topics include a myriad of financial concepts ranging from staffing and 
budgeting to measuring productivity and forecasting costs. The goal of this course is 
to enable nurses in managerial roles to implement change without negatively affecting 
patient care outcomes. Acceptance into the RN to BSN program.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN NURSING
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the dean. Normally, students enrolling will have upper-division standing, a 
2.0 GPA, and have completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated as topics change. 

4397. NURSING CAPSTONE
This course is completed by students in one of their last two terms. Each student 
conceives and completes an application-based project in the nursing subject area of their 
choice. Students work with individual faculty members who approve the projects and 
mentor students through the process. The capstone project gives students the opportunity 
to synthesize the material they have learned across multiple nursing courses and apply it 
in a practical setting. Acceptance into the RN to BSN program.
4407. NURSING CARE OF THE ADULT III
This course builds upon knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to provide patient-
centered holistic nursing care for diverse adult patients with complex multi-system health 
needs in critical care settings. Emphasis is placed on application of the nursing process, 
and nursing theories along with clinical reasoning using evidence-based nursing practice 
(EBP) directed toward health restoration, promotion, and maintenance. 
Foundations of Professional Nursing, Foundations of Professional Nursing Clinical, 
Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Nursing Care of the Adult I, Nursing Care of the 
Adult I Clinical, Nursing Care of the Adult II, Nursing Care of the Adult II Clinical, 
Research, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient, Nursing Care of the Pediatric Patient 
Clinical, Population Focused Health, Population Focused Health Clinical.
PHILOSOPHY (PHIL)
1301. (1301) INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY
This is an introduction to the basic principles and concepts in Western philosophy. 
Problems about the nature of God, minds, the physical world, and freewill are approached 
through a close study of classical and contemporary philosophical writings.
1310. (2306) INTRODUCTION TO ETHICS
This is a study of the dominant theories about the nature of morality, including 
utilitarianism, deontology, relativism, and their application to practical and timely 
moral issues.
2311. BUSINESS ETHICS
This is an in-depth analysis of ethical issues confronting contemporary business. Topics 
include the social responsibilities of business, ethics in advertising, the ethics of capitalism 
and socialism, corporate loyalty, and the profit motive. 
or consent of instructor.
2312. ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS
This is a thorough introduction to the major issues in environmental ethics and the 
proposals suggested for adequately and justly dealing with those issues. Topics 
include: Animal Rights, The Moral Implications of Darwinism, Ecology, The Ethics 
of Environmental Activism, Moral Issues Associated with Endangered Species, The 
Interests of Nonhumans, and Respect for Nature, and the Moral Standing of Other 
Species, Natural Objects and Ecosystems.
2313. HEALTH CARE ETHICS
This course will introduce ethical theories and principles and apply them to the analysis 
of seminal cases in health care ethics. 
2320. (2303) INTRODUCTION TO LOGIC
This is a study of the basic systems of logical thinking; inductive, deductive, syllogistic 
and propositional logic, and their applications.
3330. METAPHYSICS
This is a study of the major ideas about the ultimate nature of reality; focus on problems 
dealing with existence, mind, matter, space, time, and universals. 
philosophy courses and Junior standing, or consent of instructor.
3340. ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY
This is a critical study of the major philosophical ideas and the dominant thinkers in 
ancient and medieval times; emphasis on the Pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, 
and Aquinas. 
3350. EARLY MODERN PHILOSOPHY
This is a study of the foundations and possibility of genuine knowledge; rationalism, 
empiricism, critical idealism, skepticism. Emphasis is on Descartes, Leibnitz, Locke, 
Hume, and Kant. 
3360. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION
This is an examination of fundamental ideas and concepts of Christian theology, the 
challenge of modern philosophy and scientific thought, and the response of Christian 
thought. 
4341. TWENTIETH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY
This is a survey of the major philosophical trends of the twentieth century; emphasis 
on pragmatism, existentialism, logical positivism, and linguistic analysis. 
Two upper-level philosophy courses and Senior standing.
4370. TOPICS IN PHILOSOPHY
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in philosophy. May be repeated when topics 
vary. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN PHILOSOPHY
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
4395. PROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY
This is a systematic study of the major, perennial philosophical issues and their treatment 
by historically mainstream philosophers from ancient times to the present decade. Topics 
include: The Problem of Universals, The Problem of Induction, The Nature of Values, 
The Mind-Body Problem, A Priori Knowledge, Truth, and Realism/Antirealism. Will 
only be offered as an alternate to the senior thesis. 
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN PHILOSOPHY
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project.
PHYSICS (PHYS)
1100. INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY LAB

1101. COLLEGE PHYSICS I LAB

1102. COLLEGE PHYSICS II LAB

1300. INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY
This is a descriptive course in the development of astronomy and its methods, the 
motions, laws and evolution of the solar system. Topics include the general properties 
and types of stars and other stellar objects, evolution and cosmology. The laboratory 
portion is designed to provide students with exercises and simulations pertaining to the 
universe, and to provide viewing opportunities. Viewing will occur during the day and 
night. 
1301. COLLEGE PHYSICS I
A non-calculus based treatment of classical physics including kinematics, laws of 
motion, conservation of mass, momentum and energy, solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, 
oscillatory motion, and selected topics in thermal science. May be applied to physics 
requirement for medical and other science and technology related degree programs. 

score, or consent of the instructor. Concurrent enrollment in lab PHYS 1101 required.
1302. COLLEGE PHYSICS II
Topics include electricity and magnetism, optics and modern physics. Maybe applied to 
certain science and technology related degree programs. 
1101. Concurrent enrollment in lab PHYS 1102 required.
2125. UNIVERSITY PHYSICS I LAB

2126. UNIVERSITY PHYSICS II LAB

2325. UNIVERSITY PHYSICS I
A calculus-based treatment of classical physics including kinematics, laws of motion, 
conservation of mass, momentum and energy, solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, 
oscillatory motion, and selected topics in thermal science. Partial fulfillment of physics 
requirement for engineering, and other science, math and technology-related degree 
programs. 
2423 or consent of instructor. Concurrent enrollment in lab PHYS 2125.
2326. UNIVERSITY PHYSICS II
A continuation of PHYS 2425. Topics include electricity and magnetism, optics and 
modern physics. Completes the physics requirement for engineering, and other science, 
math and technology-related degree programs. 
and credit for or concurrent enrollment in MATH 2423. Concurrent enrollment in lab 
PHYS 2126.
3300. ASTROPHYSICS
This course will consider topics such as planets, stars, galaxies, and cosmology. Their 
properties, structure, kinematics, and interactions will be investigated using the tools 
of astrophysics. We will use astrophysical concepts such as gravitational collapse, 
energy generation, radiative processes, hydrostatic equilibrium and how they give rise 
to properties such as mass, size, age, temperature, and composition. We will also study 
observational techniques over a range of wavelengths.
POLITICAL SCIENCE (POLS)
2102. MOOT COURT
This is the study of modern legal interpretation combined with participation in Moot 
Court. Participation will include the detailed study and analysis of a selected problem 
in modern constitutional law, the study of legal advocacy and construction of legal 
argument, and competing in at least one Texas Undergraduate Moot Court Association 
(TUMCA) regional competition per semester. May be repeated six times.
2301.  AMERICAN GOVERNMENT  
(NATIONAL AND TEXAS) ORGANIZATION
This introductory course offers an overview of the American and Texas political 
systems. It addresses the origins of social contracts, such as the United States and Texas 
Constitutions, and the behavioral processes of functioning democracies. It covers the 
underlying powers and responsibilities of the separate branches of government as well as 
the news media and interest groups. It closes with a consideration of the current state of 
social and economic policy-making processes. 
2302. AMERICAN PUBLIC POLICY
The policy-making process, agencies and administration of public policy in the 
government of the United States, the states in general, Texas in particular are the focus 
of this course. The policy areas investigated in this course include, civil rights, criminal 
justice, taxation, defense, health and welfare, education, environment, economics, trade 
and immigration. 
2303. INTRODUCTION TO INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
This introductory course offers an overview of the global political system from a political 
science perspective. It covers alternative theoretical approaches, such as realism and 
liberalism, that are used to understand and predict global stability in terms of international 
conflict and economic growth. 
2305. INTRODUCTION TO COMPARATIVE POLITICS
This introductory course offers an overview of the global political system from a political 
science perspective. It covers alternative theoretical approaches, such as realism and 
liberalism, that are used to understand and predict global stability in terms of international 
conflict and economic growth. 
3310. THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY
This course offers an overview of the contemporary American presidency. It begins with 
a focus on the electoral politics of running for and winning the office. It then moves 
toward the president’s policy-making agenda in terms of the legislative process and the 
executive branch bureaucracy. It closes with conflicting views of presidential power 
and the role of the president in responding to crisis events. 
consent of instructor.
3320. CONGRESS AND THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS
This course offers an overview of the United States Congress and the institutional 
rules that govern the passage of public laws. It begins with a consideration of electoral 
politics and looks at the underlying goals and constituency relationships of members of 
Congress. It then moves toward a focus upon legislator role orientation and the different 
institutional rules that govern the legislative process within the House and the Senate. It 
closes with some larger perspective on the contemporary era of divided government and 
party polarization. 
3330. JUDICIAL PROCESS
This course offers an overview of the federal judiciary and how it fits in the American 
political system. It introduces the civil and common law systems and alternative theories 
of judicial decision-making. It then considers a number of critical processes, such as 
agenda setting, opinion formation, lower court compliance, and the appointment of 
judges. The course closes out with several contextual topics, including perceptions of 
judicial legitimacy and the role of courts as venues for social change. 
POLS 2301 or consent of instructor.
3340. THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS
This course offers an overview of the literature on administrative policy-making with an 
emphasis on the theories that help us understand the purpose and structure of bureaucratic 
organizations. It covers the federal rule-making process and offers insight into the 
constituent relationships between executive, legislative, judicial and interest group actors. 
It uses contemporary policy issues to identify significant changes in regulations that have 
substantial effects on society. 
3350. POLITICAL SCIENCE RESEARCH AND WRITING
This course provides an introduction to the discipline of political science with an emphasis 
on the different components of commonly accepted research design. It focuses on the 
development of research questions and theoretical frameworks that stem from a stain 
of the research literature. The course also addresses the structural aspects of effective 
writing and analysis within the discipline. It represents the first of the two course methods 
sequence for the major. 
of instructor.
3351. SOCIAL AND POLITICAL THEORY
This course offers an overview of the literature associated with the field of political theory. 
It follows a temporal sequence that reaches all the way back to the earliest origins of 
Grecian society, transitions to the seminal foundations of American political thought, and 
progresses to contemporary views of justice and current global dilemmas. 
3352. U.S. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
This is a systematic examination of the fundamental ideas of law and jurisprudence with 
an emphasis on the status of United States common law precedent. Course topics will 
focus on the fundamental differences between civil law and common law systems and 
examine the development of the landmark precedents that define separation of powers, 
civil liberties and civil rights within the United States. 
3371. POLITICAL SCIENCE RESEARCH METHODS
This course covers the standards that govern political science research. It focuses on the 
empirical practices of hypothesis testing and statistical inference. Students will learn a 
range of statistical techniques, such as t-tests, analysis of variance, and linear regression. 
They will also learn how to effectively present empirical analysis through plots of 
relationships and tables of results. It represents the second of the two course methods 
sequence for the major. 
3372. INTERNATIONAL LAW
This course provides an in depth overview of the major components of international 
law. The course addresses both the historical development of international law and its 
contemporary form. Particular emphasis is placed on how international law, as manifested 
through treaties and norms, influences the behavior of states in the international system 
and how they interact with inter-governmental organizations, non-governmental 
organizations, multinational corporations, individuals and other states. These issues will 
be explored through readings, lectures, case studies and documentaries.
3373. MODEL UN
The purpose of this course is to prepare students to participate in the National Model 
United Nations, where the class will represent an assigned country on a number of United 
Nations committees. This preparation includes: 1) public speaking and negotiation skills, 
2) knowledge of the assigned country, 3) NMUN rules of procedure, and the UN system, 
and 4) resolution and position paper writing. Given time constraints and the fact that 
class will be divided up among several committees (each of which will address different 
topics) students will be required to do independent research on the assigned country and 
its position on respective committee topics. 
3374. POLITICAL PSYCHOLOGY AND BIOPOLITICS
This course offers an overview of the role that psychology and biology plays in 
influencing the political behavior of individuals, groups, and governments. The 
application of psychological approaches in the fields of American politics, comparative 
politics, and international relations will be explored. Topics covered include, but are not 
limited to: public opinion, attitude and ideological formation, voting behavior and policy 
preference formation, elite decision-making, intergroup relations/conflict. These issues 
will be addressed in light of empirical findings in the fields of political science, social 
psychology, cognitive psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and biology, and experimental 
philosophy. 
3375. INTERNATIONAL SECURITY
This course offers an overview of the field of security studies. The course will center on 
warfare (how it starts, how it is conducted, and how it can be prevented?). The course 
explores a variety of topics related to warfare such as the development of military and 
strategic doctrine, strategic decision-making, deterrence, the role of weapons (e.g. 
conventional, nuclear, chemical/biological), bureaucratic and organizational politics 
within the security establishment, and terrorism and asymmetric warfare. Furthermore, 
students will explore these topics through the lenses of a variety of international relations 
theories. 
3376. TEXAS COURTS AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
This course offers an overview of state courts and their critical role as arbiters within 
criminal justice systems. It focuses upon Southwestern political context and will cover 
the specialized Texas/Oklahoma system of criminal appeals. It addresses the electoral 
systems associated with state judgeships and the implications that electoral ties have 
on judicial decision-making. It considers relevant topics such as wrongful convictions, 
application of the death penalty and law enforcement organizations. 
POLS 2301.
3383. INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY
This is a study of the interrelationship between political and economic factors in 
international relations with a focus on theoretical perspectives on the relationship between 
international economics and politics, trade policies, trends in integration of political and 
economic systems, the role of multi-national corporations and economic organizations in 
the modern world. 
3384. REGIONAL STUDY
This is an interdisciplinary survey of a world region focusing on the geographic, 
historical, cultural, economic, and political factors most affecting the role of this region 
within the international community today. Regions such as Latin America, Europe, The 
Middle East, and Asia will be offered on a rotating schedule. May be repeated when 
region changes. 
3385. THE AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY PROCESS
This is the study of the foreign policy making process and factors influencing U.S. 
international political and economic behavior since 1945. Special emphasis will include 
foreign policy issues affecting the United States political and economic interests in the 
coming decade. 
3398. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP
This is a supervised field experience with a governmental, political or legal entity that 
will provide the student with a professional experience and an opportunity to apply prior 
learning in a contemporary setting. May be repeated. 
2303, or POLS 2305, or consent of instructor.
4370. TOPICS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
This is selected topics course in the discipline of political science. Topics will vary; course 
may be repeated when topics vary. 
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the study and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally, students enrolling will have at least a 
junior-level status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated 
with a change in topic.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis, 
comparable senior project, or peer reviewed publication (either published or accepted for 
publication by the appropriate deadline).
PSYCHOLOGY (PSYC)
1300. PSYCHOLOGY OF ADJUSTMENT
This course emphasizes applications of psychology to personal development and 
improvement of social relationships. Topics may include study of self-concept and 
self esteem, values, sex roles, stress and anxiety, friendship and intimate relationships, 
failures of adjustment, treatment models, social problems, and techniques for personal 
fulfillment and growth.
1301. (2301) INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY
The purpose of this course is to familiarize the student with the basic principles that shape 
how people think, feel, and behave. Topics of study will include the biology of the brain 
and nervous system, sensation and perception, consciousness, learning and memory, 
motivation and emotion, and personality. In addition, the student will learn how thoughts, 
feelings and actions are affected by social situations, and about selected psychological 
disorders and the therapy methods that have been developed to treat them.
2300. LIFE-SPAN DEVELOPMENT
This is an introductory survey of developmental psychology from infancy to later aging. 
Topics include cognitive/intellectual development, social development, personality/
emotional development, and effects of parenting, social roles, and biological changes. 
Students will have the opportunity to apply concepts and theories to their personal 
experiences. 
2370. TOPICS IN PSYCHOLOGY
This is the study of a particular topic in psychology. May be repeated when topics vary.
3101. INTRO TO PRACTICUM: AUTISM SPECTRUM
This course will prepare psychology students for a support role in mentoring college 
students on the autism spectrum. Students will learn about the diagnostic criteria and 
features of autism spectrum disorders, characteristics and challenges of students on the 
autism spectrum, suspected causes, and treatment approaches. Ethical issues will also be 
addressed. Students will also learn and practice the advanced interpersonal skills required 
to assist such students in transitioning to the collegiate environment.
3102. PRACTICUM II: AUTISM SPECTRUM
This is an experiential course in which upper-level psychology majors will work as peer 
mentors assisting new college freshmen who are on the autism spectrum in transitioning to 
college life. Students will gain practical, hands-on experience in applying psychological 
concepts and principles and will use advanced interpersonal skills to develop rapport 
with their mentees. Students will be expected to meet individually with an assigned 
mentee for a minimum of two hours per week, and to meet weekly with the other peer 
mentors and the course instructor. Junior standing, completion of PSYC 3101 with a 
grade of B or higher, recommendation by two faculty members, one of whom must be in 
the psychology department.
3103. PRACTICUM III: AUTISM SPECTRUM
This is a continuation of PSYC 3101 and 3102 that provides additional hands-on 
experience for upper-level psychology majors working as peer mentors to assist new 
freshmen who are on the autism spectrum with the transition to college life. Students will 
be expected to meet individually with an assigned mentee for a minimum of two hours 
per week, and to assist in training new peer mentors who will work with freshmen on the 
autism spectrum the following fall. 
3101 and 3102 with a grade of B or higher, recommendation by two faculty members, 
one of whom must be in the psychology department.
3303.  DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY:  
CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE
This course covers the significant aspects of human development from conception 
through adolescence. Topics include the influences upon development of such things as 
social and emotional growth, personality, intellectual capacity, and the acquisition and 
usage of language. Also stressed is the relevance of these topics to parent effectiveness. 

3304.  DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY:  
ADULTHOOD AND AGING
This course focuses on human development from young adulthood through old age. Main 
emphases are on the social and emotional changes associated with various stages of adult 
life. The crises typically encountered by individuals in their twenties, thirties, and forties, 
etc. are studied, including shifts in self-concept, sexual desires, attitudes toward life, 
conceptions of death, etc. Development during the period of old age is also covered. 

3305. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY
This course focuses on the nature of abnormality, theoretical models of the causes of 
abnormal behavior, major diagnostic categories (such as depression, schizophrenia and 
personality disorders), and treatment models. 
standing or consent of instructor.
3306. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
This course focuses on social factors that influence individual behavior, thoughts, and 
feelings. Topics covered include attitude formation and change, altruism, aggression, 
attraction, conformity, interpersonal relationships, and group processes. 
PSYC 1301 and Junior standing, or consent of instructor.
3307. HUMAN SEXUALITY
This course provides an overview of human sexuality from the perspective of academic 
psychology. Biological, social, developmental, interpersonal, and emotional aspects of 
the subject are covered in detail. 
3310. SENSATION AND PERCEPTION
This course constitutes an examination of how the human visual and auditory senses 
operate. The connection between nervous system activity in the sensory systems and 
perceptual experience will also be examined. The course includes descriptions of how 
perceptual data are collected ranging from the electrical firing of a single neuron to an 
individual’s description of their experiences. In addition, analyses of the many theoretical 
models that have been developed to give meaning to this data will be provided. 

3320. PSYCHOLOGY OF MOTIVATION
This course examines many different approaches to the study of factors which activate, 
direct, maintain, and terminate behavior patterns in both animals and humans. Covers 
a range of theoretical perspectives including biological, behavior, and cognitive 
interpretations. 
3330. PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONALITY
This course examines major trait approaches to personality and their correlates, including 
authoritarianism, anxiety, achievement, locus of control, introversion-extraversion, 
dependency and approval, etc. Methods of scale construction and the relationship 
of traits to situations will also be examined. Students will be able to assess their own 
dimensions in many cases, and both clinical and workplace applications will be explored. 
Prerequisite; PSYC 1301 and junior standing.
3341. CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR
This course will provide an overview of research on crime including the social, 
psychological and biological origins of crime, with emphasis on the psychological 
perspective. The behavioral, emotional and cognitive aspects of crime will be examined 
from the perspective of both the offender and the victim. The causes, classification, 
prediction, prevention, intervention and treatment of criminal behavior will be covered. 

3360. RESEARCH METHODS I
This course is the first of a two-part sequence. The student will be introduced to data 
collection and analysis techniques for the behavioral sciences with an emphasis on the use 
of descriptive statistics to summarize collected data using tables and graphs. Major topics 
include probability, the normal distribution, and an introduction to hypothesis testing. 
Student will also be introduced to the critical steps of the scientific method including 
theory development, research design decisions, and validity and reliability concerns. 
Each student will be expected to design and run an experimental simulation and conduct 
an in-depth literature review in the topic area of that simulation. Required for psychology 
majors. 
(Statistics) prior to enrolling in PSYC 3360 with the exception of instructor permission.
3361. RESEARCH METHODS II
This course is the second of a two-part sequence. The student will learn to use parametric 
and nonparametric inferential statistical analyses. In addition, instruction in professional 
research report writing will be provided. Methodological design and data interpretation 
issues first presented in Research Methods I will be expanded and students will be 
expected to apply their accumulating research skills in the form of a completed formal 
report on the simulated experiment started in the first part of the course sequence. 
Required for psychology majors. 
4307. THEORIES OF PERSONALITY
This course compares and contrasts the major historical approaches to personality, 
including Psychoanalytic, Humanistic, and Learning derived theories. These theories 
define the context for modern explanations of human personality, behavior, and abnormal 
psychology. 
4310. ENVIRONMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
This is a study of transactions between individuals and their physical settings. Includes 
topics such as environmental perception/cognition, personality, personal space, 
territoriality, crowding, and privacy. Applications to better design of residences, 
communities, schools, workplaces and/or natural environments are encouraged in student 
reports and projects. 
4320. INTRODUCTION TO COUNSELING
This course is an overview of counseling psychology that addresses counseling 
settings, counseling theories, individual and group counseling, psychological testing 
and assessment and professional ethics. Students will also learn and practice skills in 
interpersonal effectiveness. 
4330. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
This course surveys various topics in areas of perception, memory, and thinking. Such 
topics include pattern perception, mental imagery, short and long-term memory systems, 
visual and verbal thinking, and language comprehension. 
Junior standing, or consent of instructor.
4331. CROSS CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY
Cross-cultural psychology compares effects of cultures on human psychology, examining 
psychological diversity and the links between cultural norms and behavior. This course 
provides an understanding of the variety of human behavior as it emerges in the 
cultural context and of the development of certain individual characteristics, thoughts 
and behaviors in relation to cultural factors. 
standing or consent of the instructor.
4360. HISTORY AND SYSTEMS OF PSYCHOLOGY
This course examines the development of psychology as a science. Various systemic 
approaches to understanding human behavior are studied and the impact of prominent 
theorists evaluated. 
4361. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DECISION MAKING
This course will examine the biological, cognitive and social-psychological processes 
that underlie judgments and decision making. Recent research on a variety of aspects 
of decision making will be discussed. Topics will include economic behavior, social 
behavior, rational decision making and emotional decision making.
4370. TOPICS IN PSYCHOLOGY
This is specific topics within an identified area of psychology selected by the instructor. 
Topics will vary, and the course may be repeated for credit with a change in topic. 

4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN PSYCHOLOGY
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally, students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
4397. SENIOR SEMINAR IN PSYCHOLOGY
This is a required course for graduating psychology majors to practice research, 
writing, discussion, and presentation skills. Content areas of study include employment 
expectations for B.A. graduates, graduate school options and preparation, rules of 
APA style, and a selection of classic research studies in the history of psychology. 

current or subsequent semester.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN PSYCHOLOGY
This course is a supervised field experience in applied psychology. Students will gain 
practical hands-on experience in mental health and/or social services setting and will meet 
weekly as a class for supplemental instructions in the practice of professional psychology. 
135 hours required, 90 of which must be in the practical internship. 
status, or consent of instructor.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN PSYCHOLOGY
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project.
PUBLIC HEALTH
3171. PROFESSIONALISM IN PUBLIC HEALTH
The overall goal of this course is to introduce students to the core competencies for 
public health professionals, a set of skills required for public health practice. These 
concepts will help prepare for working in a variety of public health settings, including 
the internship required for the Public Health major. It will explore unique interests within 
the field, examine how they apply to the essential services of public health, and describe 
how the liberal arts and sciences approach at Schreiner University has prepared students 
for a future in public health.
3371. PUBLIC HEALTH
This course introduces students to the context and scope of public health, including 
the history, philosophy, literature essential services and ethics of the field, and their 
applications to current events. 
3372. GLOBAL HEALTH
This course introduces students to the basic frameworks for understanding global health 
issues and the improvement of health at a population level. The course also examines 
human rights, ethics and global health, as well as the health systems in developing and 
developed countries. Global cooperation in health issues is explored. 
hours of Biology or consent of instructor.
3373. EPIDEMIOLOGY
This course is a study of how disease and population health are monitored, and how 
outbreaks are investigated and managed. This course is a basic introduction to 
epidemiology. Topics include: classification of disease, understanding of incidence and 
prevalence, understanding of how data are used to identify patterns, surveillance, and 
experimental design. 
3474. ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
This course studies the impact of the environment on health. Topics include water and 
air pollution and the effects of environmental toxicants, and environmental regulations 
designed to protect human health. 
(3-2)
4355. HEALTH POLICY
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the important aspects of health care 
delivery and financing, and to evaluate current health policy issues.
4374. COMMUNITY HEALTH
The purpose of this course is to focus on the role of the public health professional in 
the design and delivery of socially responsible, safe, competent, compassionate, and 
culturally sensitive care in a changing global society. Students may engage in medical 
mission work abroad or may work in local, underserved populations. 
hours of Biology or consent of instructor.
4397. PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP IN PUBLIC HEALTH
This course is a supervised field experience in public health which provides the 
opportunity for the student to apply prior learning to practical job experiences. 135 hours 
of experience is required. 
READING (RDNG)
3306. FOUNDATION IN READING
This course is designed to introduce the reading process to teacher education students. An 
emphasis is placed on beginning reading skills including phonics, phonemic awareness, 
fluency, oral and written communication, vocabulary, and comprehension. Candidates 
will learn how to create a print rich environment and create learning experiences based 
on Scientific Based Reading Research (SBRR) theories of reading education. Candidates 
will be introduced to multisensory intervention techniques that address students with 
dyslexia or dyslexic tendencies. Candidates will also become familiar with the Dyslexia 
handbook, and other resources for dyslexia and students with dyslexic tendencies. 
Candidates will understand the use of assessment, benchmarks, progress monitoring to 
address the reading needs of students EC-8, as well as determine students’ reading levels 
(Independent, Instructional, or Frustration). Candidates will learn the use of Readability 
Formulas in order to match the student with an appropriate text. Strategies for the 
struggling reader, ESL, and ELL student are included in this course. Applicable EC-
12 PPR Standards and Technology, and Competencies for EC-6 Core Subjects and 4-8 
Reading, Language Arts and the reading scope and sequence and understanding of the 
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) and Implementation of Texas Essential 
Knowledge and Skills for Technology Applications for EC-8 will be addressed. Required 
for EC-6 Core Subjects, 4-8 Core Subjects, and 4-8 English/Language Arts.
3308.  DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION  
OF READING DIFFICULTIES
This field-based course is designed for teacher candidates to become skilled in classroom 
reading diagnosis and remediation of reading difficulties. This course will focus on the 
administration, analysis and interpretation of informal diagnostic procedures in order to 
evaluate reading skills in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency, 
and comprehension. The use of Reading Interest Inventories, Benchmarks, and Progress 
Monitoring assessment results will drive the teacher candidate’s intervention plans 
and instructional techniques to facilitate reading success. Candidates will incorporate 
multisensory intervention techniques that address students with dyslexia or dyslexic 
tendencies. The Dyslexia Handbook and other resources for dyslexia will be incorporated 
in this course, as well as strategies for the ESL and ELL student. This course requires 
10 hour supervised practicum at the Schreiner University Reading Academy. Teacher 
candidates will prepare lesson plans and activities using research-based Science of 
Reading strategies aligned to reading objectives and standards. Candidates will write 
a case study that includes assessment data; student strengths and needs; intervention 
strategies; and recommendations for further instruction on completion of this course. 
Candidates will conference with students and parents weekly to discuss student progress. 
Applicable EC-12 PPR Standards and Technology, and Competencies for EC-6 and 
4-8 Core Subjects, Reading/Language Arts and the reading scope and sequence and 
understanding of the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills and Implementation of 
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Technology Applications for EC-8 will also 
be addressed. Required for EC-6 Core Subjects, 4-8 Core Subjects, and 4-8 English/
Language Arts. 
Teacher Education.
3310.  ELAR TEST PREPARATION AND PEDAGOGY 
This pedagogy course serves as methodology training in the area of English Language 
Arts and Reading for EC-6, 4-8, and 7-12 levels of teacher certification. The course is 
also open as an elective for English majors. Research based strategies and assessment in 
the language arts are emphasized and applied through lesson preparation, reading/writing 
workshop, literacy circles, and the creation of Literature Focus Units using applicable 
TEKS and STR standards. Training in instructional technology is also included along 
with visual literacy skills. Strategies for working with English Language Learners (ELL) 
and English as a Second Language (ESL) using applicable English Language Proficiency 
Standards (ELPS) will be emphasized along with TExES content test preparation for ELA 
and Reading and English certifications. Requirement for EC-6 and 4-8 Core Subjects and 
ELA 4-8 and English 7-12 with Teacher Certification. 
admission to Teacher Education Program.
3340. READING THROUGH CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
This course includes motivational and effective techniques and methods of teaching reading 
through the use of children’s and adolescent literature with emphasis on genres, author 
and illustration studies, global, multicultural and international publications, and historical 
and contemporary publishing trends. It also provides criteria for building an equitable 
and balanced literary collection for home, classroom, and library with an overview of 
historical and social forces shaping contemporary children’s literature. Emphasis will 
be on the use of children’s literature-based reading programs which address the Texas 
Essential Knowledge and Skills centered on developmentally appropriate processes for 
reading comprehension and writing using a transactional approach to reading based on 
constructivist research and theory. 
consent of instructor.
4301. SCIENCE OF TEACHING READING AND WRITING
This course is designed to help teacher candidates acquire the necessary skills of teaching 
reading and writing from pre-kindergarten through the intermediate grades. This course 
will focus on reading pedagogy, reading development, foundational skills, reading 
comprehension, analysis, and the response domains of the TExES Science of Teaching 
Reading (STR) exam required by the state for certification in EC-6 Core Subjects, EC-4 
Core Subjects, and 4-8 ELAR. Emphasis will be placed on diagnostic and intervention 
teaching strategies and integrating Science of Reading instruction and strategies to meet 
the needs and interests of developing readers and writers. STR test preparation modules, 
a program practice test in STR, and in class modeling and applications of STR knowledge 
and skills will be used to demonstrate STR test readiness and classroom proficiency in 
teaching reading and writing. Required for EC-6 Core Subjects, 4-8 Core Subjects, and 
4-8. 4309.  DISCIPLINARY LITERACY  
ACROSS THE CONTENT AREAS
Disciplinary Literacy Across the Content Areas is a research-based strategy course 
designed to include and promote reading and writing as discipline specific tools for 
learning across the curriculum. Students will participate in individual research, group 
demonstrations and presentations, and the design of an individualized strategy toolbox 
for addressing all literacy skills as they apply to specific content disciplines and in 
preparation for the Teacher Performance Assessment. This course will work to show 
competency in understanding diversity and planning effective learning experiences and 
assessment for all students. Students must use appropriate TEKS that are addressed in 
each certification level for their assignments. Based on current research in the field, the 
emphasis will be effective pedagogy for 21st century learning and applied to Tasks of 
the Teacher Performance Assessment. 5 Hours of Video Observations and Reflections 
are required. 
Must be taken concurrently with EDUC 4305.
RELIGION (RELI)
1303. SURVEY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT
This is a study of the history, literature, and teachings of the Old Testament.
1304. SURVEY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT
This is a study of the history, literature, and teachings of the New Testament.
1320. SURVEY OF WORLD RELIGIONS: EASTERN RELIGIONS
This is a survey course designed to introduce students to the origin, development, 
beliefs, and practices of the major religious traditions associated with Eastern and 
Southeastern Asia, in particular focusing on Hinduism, Buddhism, and Chinese Religions 
(Confucianism and Taoism). Students will explore the significance of the spiritual, 
intellectual, and cultural legacies of these traditions such that critical reflection upon 
and comparative analysis of various religions may help students develop their own 
worldviews.
1322. HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH
This is an introduction to the growth and development of the Christian Church’s doctrines, 
structures, and interaction with its cultural setting from New Testament times to the dawn 
of the 16th century Reformation.
1331. SURVEY OF WESTERN RELIGIONS
This is a survey course designed to introduce students to the origin, development, beliefs, 
and practices of the major Abrahamic religious traditions (Judaism, Christianity, Islam) 
associated with the global “West.” Students will explore the significance of the spiritual, 
intellectual, and cultural legacies of these traditions such that critical reflection upon 
and comparative analysis of various religions may help students develop their own 
worldviews.
2311. DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS
This is an introduction to the content and methods of Christian ethical thought as it 
has developed over the centuries, and its application to contemporary issues of loyalty, 
integrity, and responsibility in the ever changing and more complex world of business, 
politics, and social institutions.
2370. TOPICS IN RELIGION
This is an introduction to particular topics in religion. May be repeated when topics vary.
3303. HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF SACRED MUSIC
This is a study of the development of the various service formats of the Christian church, 
the types of music developed for them and its relationship to secular music, and the 
practical use of different styles of music in worship today. 
or consent of instructor. See MUSC 3303.
3321. THE REFORMATION ERA
This is a comprehensive treatment of the period from 1500 through 1650, during which 
time the unifying umbrella of Christianity was shattered. Topics include a causal analysis 
of the Reformation, Lutheranism, the spread of Protestantism and the Catholic revival, 
and religious consequences and conflicts.
3322. CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY
This is an exploration of classical and contemporary Christian theology and the 
challenging contributions of liberation theological perspectives to the life and thought of 
Christians living in a pluralistic world.
3360. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION
This is an examination of fundamental ideas and concepts of Christian theology, the 
challenge of modern philosophy and scientific thought, and the response of Christian 
thought. 
3361. CHURCH AND STATE
This course is designed to address the ever present dynamic of religious belief in the 
social sphere. This study will address the role religion has played in shaping society (and 
vice versa) in ways that affect public morality, political institutions, and social policy. 
Focus will concentrate on church/state relations within the United States although such a 
dynamic in the global community will also be explored.
3362. SCIENCE AND RELIGION
This course is a systematic examination of the past history, current status, and future 
trajectory of the relationship between science and religion. This study will explore the 
tension between these disciplines often regarded as distinct from and, sometimes at odds 
with, one another. Potential topics for consideration will include evolution, creationism, 
chaos theory, quantum cosmology, and grand unified theories of the universe as well as 
comparative uses of analogy and reductionism.
3397. LEADING LIVES THAT MATTER
This Junior level course will focus on issues of work and vocation in conversation with 
what constitutes a meaningful and fulfilling life. Drawing upon biblical, sociological 
and reflective practices in making personal decisions concerning the choice of work as 
discerned through the lens of ones faith tradition. Each student will have the opportunity 
to observe and interview a member of the community in his/her work setting and reflect 
upon that individual’s integration of faith and work. At the end of the course, students 
will articulate their own understanding of what constitutes a meaningful life personally 
and professionally. They will also have tools and strategies they can use for further 
exploration into who they want to be and what they want to do in the future. 
4340. CONVICTION AND DISSENT
This course examines the relationship between religious conviction and political power. It 
explores how religious persons affirm, reject, or persuade institutions with their behavior. 
Finally it considers how faith communities adhere to transcendent religious convictions 
within immanent political structures.
4363. RELIGION IN LITERATURE AND FILM
This course includes the reading of several novels and selected contemporary fiction as 
well as the screening of contemporary films that invite religious reflection on modern and 
post-modern world views. 
junior standing; or consent of instructor.
4370. TOPICS IN RELIGION
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in religion. May be repeated when topics vary.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN RELIGION
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate dean. Normally students enrolling will have upper-level 
status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated with a change 
in topic.
4395. PROBLEMS IN THEOLOGY
This is a systematic study of Biblical and/or theological issues and their treatment by 
major scholars in the respective fields of study. Topics include: The nature of Revelation: 
The relation of Faith and Culture; Free Will and Determinism; Theodicy; The Christian 
Life as Sanctification; Eschatology and Christian Ethics; The Church and Contemporary 
Cosmology. Will only be offered as an alternate to the Senior Thesis. 
4398. CHRISTIAN VOCATION INTERNSHIP
Supervised field service which provides the opportunity for the student to apply prior 
learning to practical experience in a Christian work setting. 
12 hours in religion including Old and New Testament, minimum of 6 hours in a related 
field such as Education, Psychology, Business Administration. (Preplanning needs to be 
done with the director of the Christian Vocation Internship Program).
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN RELIGION
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project.
SOCIOLOGY (SOCI)
1301. (1301) INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF SOCIETY
This is an introduction to the study of social structure, groups, institutions, socialization, 
cultural differences and problems. The course stresses the sociological explanations 
which underlie patterns of behavior such as the myth of the ‘‘melting pot,” racial and 
sexist discrimination, advertising and media trends, family values, the growth of an 
American underclass, and deviant behavior.
2302. (2301) MARRIAGE AND FAMILY
This is a study of social systems and psychological factors affecting the pivotal institution 
of marriage in the late 20th century. The systems theory of family therapy will be utilized 
to illuminate how family structure and reciprocal processes create the family roles. The 
course will consider factors which contribute to a rewarding married life.
2303. INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL WORK
This course studies the development of the philosophy and practice of social work in 
the United States. A survey of the various fields and techniques of social work with 
special attention given to requirements for graduate training in the professional schools is 
included. 
2304. SOCIOLOGY OF HEALTH
This course will examine the effects of social forces in shaping health, illness and the 
health care system. The course will focus on understanding health disparities based on 
age, gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity and socioeconomic status. This course introduces the 
student to the perspective that social forces can shape health inequality in the U.S. Topics 
include social factors associated with health and disease, disability, the organization of 
health care, and medical ethics. The majority of the course will focus on health and illness 
in the United States but will make some references to health and health care in other 
countries and regions.
SPANISH (SPAN)
Students with a placement score at the level of SPAN 1402 or above may, upon written 
request to the Registrar, be given credit for required courses at the appropriate level.
1401. ELEMENTARY SPANISH I
This is an introductory course which focuses upon basic reading, writing, listening and 
speaking of Spanish. Significant aspects of Spanish-language cultures are also addressed. 
This course is the first in a sequence of introductory Spanish courses.
1402. ELEMENTARY SPANISH II
This course, a continuation of SPAN 1401, expands reading, writing, listening and 
speaking skills as it expands knowledge of Spanish-language cultural traits. 
2303. (2311) INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I
This course provides a comprehensive review of major grammatical structures and 
vocabulary and expands upon them via cultural and contemporary readings. Course 
conducted primarily in Spanish. 
test score.
2304. (2312) INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II
This course expands upon information presented in SPAN 2303. Course conducted 
primarily in Spanish. 
2307. SPANISH FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS
This is an intermediate-level Spanish course designed to help current and aspiring 
healthcare professionals to improve their abilities to use the Spanish language effectively 
in contexts of patient interactions in the U.S. and abroad. The focus will include building 
vocabulary specific to the medical field as well as bolstering students’ ease of overall 
language use through interactive practice and task-based communicative approaches. 
The class is designed for intermediate learners who, either through previous study or 
personal experience, already possess a basic foundation of Spanish on which to build 
their skills for medical interactions specifically. Where possible and appropriate, the 
course will also support students’ development of the informed cultural perspectives that 
should characterize quality patient care for Latinos in the U.S. 
or equivalent placement through Schreiner’s placement exam. (*Since prior coursework 
at other institutions is a poor predictor of students’ actual skill level, fulfillment of 
prerequisites through transfer coursework alone should not be allowed for this course, 
students must confirm their level through SU’s placement exam.)
2370. TOPICS IN SPANISH
This course is a study of subjects not otherwise offered and may be repeated when topics 
vary. 
3301.  A SURVEY OF LATIN-AMERICAN LITERATURE  
TO THE 20TH CENTURY
This is an introductory course of selected readings in Spanish that includes poetry 
and prose of some notable writers of Mexico, Latin America, and the Caribbean. The 
content will incorporate literature that is significant in reflecting major historical and 
literary periods from the Spanish invasion and Colonialism through the emergence of 
contemporary and modernistic production. The lectures will be conducted primarily in 
Spanish. 
3302.  A SURVEY OF PENINSULAR LITERATURE  
TO THE 20TH CENTURY
This is an introductory course of selected Spanish readings, both poetry and prose, that 
embrace and reflect the major historical and literary periods of Spain. Through lecture 
and cursory writings, students will be exposed to important works that incorporate the 
Spanish Middle Ages, Renaissance, Romanticism and Realism, as well as the historical 
implications of such writings. Lectures will primarily be conducted in Spanish. 

3303.  A SURVEY OF LATIN-AMERICAN LITERATURE  
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
This course concentrates heavily on contemporary Hispanic-American writings that 
reflect literary innovations that bring Mexican and Latin-American writers to the forefront 
of international creative thought and literary production. Historical impetus with respect 
to political and social implications will be discussed. Such writers as Neruda, Del Castro, 
Borges, Cortazar, Fuentes, Vargas-Llosa and others will be studied. The course will 
primarily be conducted in Spanish. 
3304.  A SURVEY OF PENINSULAR LITERATURE  
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
This is an introduction to selected writings that reflect contemporary Spanish thought 
and recent history that have given rise to current literary trends. Such movements as 
Modernism, and Avant Garde will be discussed as well as events, such as the Spanish 
Civil War, will be discussed in relation to literary implications. Notable Spanish writers 
and poets such as Lorca, Valle-Inclan, Unamuno and Machado as well as Cela, Matute, 
Calvo Sotelo and others will be reviewed. Lectures will primarily be conducted in 
Spanish. 
3305.  CURRENT HISPANIC AMERICAN THOUGHT  
AND LITERATURE
This course focuses on contemporary Hispanic-American life in Mexico, Latin America, 
and the United States. Using films, newspaper articles, art, personal testimonies, and 
literature, the course examines the social, political, and economic dynamics of various 
Hispanic-American groups. A certain emphasis will be placed on the problems that 
confront Mexican Americans and other Hispanic-Americans in the United States as 
well as their contributions. Such issues to be studied include immigration, acculturation/
assimilation; self-identity, and linguistic variance and implication. This course will be 
conducted primarily in Spanish. 
3310. GATEWAY TO HISPANIC STUDIES
This course offers advanced-level students of Spanish the opportunity to refine their 
skills for academic writing, critical analysis and self-expression while exploring a variety 
of literary texts and cultural artifacts from the Spanish-speaking world. 
Coordinator or Instructor.
3370. TOPICS IN SPANISH
This topics course is designed to offer students the chance to explore any number of 
specialized topics relating to the cultural production of the Spanish-speaking world, a 
geopolitical entity that includes – but it not limited to – Spain, Latin America, and the 
United States. Course focus will incorporate topics that are not otherwise covered in 
regularly-offered upper-division classes (e.g., specialized and/or comparative studies of 
cultural and linguistic phenomena and topics, and/or focused explorations of specific 
genres, periods, movements, writers or artists, etc.). As an upper-division course, all 
content, discussion, lecture, assignments will be in Spanish language. 
SPAN 2304 or equivalent placement, or consent of the instructor.
4370. TOPICS IN SPANISH
This is a study of subjects not otherwise offered. May be repeated when topics vary. 

4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN SPANISH
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the dean. Normally, students enrolling will have upper-division standing, 
a 2.0 GPA, and have completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated as topics vary.
4399. SENIOR PROJECT IN SPANISH
This is an independent capstone research investigation culminating in a senior thesis or 
comparable senior project.
SPECIAL EDUCATION (SPED)
3301. FOUNDATIONS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION 
This course provides an overview of the field of special education and examination of 
forces affecting treatment of exceptional persons throughout history, including federal 
and state legal requirements as well as current issues and terminology relative to 
education of exceptional learners. This course provides for the examination of types, 
characteristics, and causes of various exceptionalities. It also serves as an introduction to 
the instructional needs of the exceptional students in the home, school, and community. 
Instruction includes the development of instructional practices and strategies for inclusive 
classrooms. The course includes 5 hours of observations and reflections either through 
FBE on campus or by video involving students with special needs. 
2303 or with the consent of the instructor.
TEXAS STUDIES (TXST)
1301. INTRODUCTION TO TEXAS STUDIES
This interdisciplinary course is designed to provide students with a general overview of 
the Texas Studies major, introducing them to the broad subject fields of Texas history, 
Texas natural science, Texas culture, literature and song, Texas economic and corporate 
development, Texas visual arts, Texas political institutions, and Texas ethnic studies. 
Some travel may be required as a component of this course.
2370. TOPICS IN TEXAS STUDIES
This is an in-depth study of particular topics in Texas Studies. May be repeated when 
topics vary. 
3320. THE TEXAS REVOLUTION AND REPUBLIC
A scholarly study of the Texas Revolution and Republic. Topics include Mexican Texas, 
early Anglo and Empressario settlement, the troubles of 1832, the Texas Revolution of 
1835-1836, the formation of the Republic of Texas, and the annexation of Texas to the 
United States. 
3321. THE TEXAS FRONTIER
A scholarly and public history approach to the study of the closing half century of the 
Texas frontier. Topics include the 1880s Texas Frontier, the 1900s Texas Frontier, and 
the 1920s Texas Frontier. It combines elements of traditional scholarly offerings with 
techniques used in public history to demonstrate how the passing of the frontier was a 
three-generation process that established patterns, through museums and local history, 
still recognizable in the state today.
3330. TEXAS CULTURE, LITERATURE AND SONG
This course will provide a survey of the literature of Texas using the context of geography 
and culture for organization. Each unit will cover both Texas writers and Texas songwriters. 
Included in the course will be a focus on the importance of lyrics as an aspect of Texas 
literature, the importance of location and venue, the role of culture, and the importance 
of biography in both literature and song. Texas music is a broad and expansive category. 
This course will also explore the literary, cultural and historical aspects of songs written 
by Texas songwriters. The Texas songwriting genre inspires literary references, and many 
of the songwriters have talked about this.
3340. TEXAS NATURAL SCIENCES
Aspects of Texas’s natural history will be explored through investigation of small-to 
large-scale biological and ecological interactions. Students will review, discuss, and 
explore Texas species and ecosystems. Relationships between climate, geography, and 
geological history will be addressed in explaining current diversity and distributions of 
Texas’ flora and fauna. This course will focus on species and ecosystems that students 
can experience without much specialized equipment (i.e., they may need binoculars 
and boots but not necessarily microscopes or radio-tracking gear). Emphasis will be 
given to species and ecosystems that are unique to Texas, germane ecosystem services, 
and personal exploration of species and ecosystems close to each student’s home or 
campus. Surveys in lab will focus on abundance, diversity, and distribution of species 
and ecosystems.
4305. GRAND TOUR OF TEXAS
This is a travel course and seminar for the Texas Studies minor that uses the entire state 
as its classroom. This course will involve hands on investigation of every region in Texas, 
by driving from one corner to the other, and back again. Students will complete a project 
on a specialized interest in some aspect of Texas history or culture. 
THEATRE (THRE)
Schreiner offers courses leading to a Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in Theatre. 
The Theatre program supports the standards of liberal arts education expressed in the 
philosophy of the University. Both lower and upper level courses in theatre prepare 
students for careers in professional, educational, and community theatre programs, as 
well as further and more specific study in graduate theatre programs. Individualized 
instruction is emphasized in certain upper level theatre courses through internship 
opportunities, as well as performance responsibilities. This program emphasizes a strong, 
general foundation in theatre basics. Majors may pursue either a technical or performance 
theatre focus.
The major consists of 27 advanced hours in theatre including: ENGL 3334, THRE 3301, 
3302, 3305, 3306, 4325, 4333, 4340, 4350 or 4351, and 4398.
The Minor in Theatre: 21 hours, THRE 1301, 2301, 3301, 3302 and 9 hours from 3305, 
3335, 4333, 4340, 4350, 4351, 4370 or 4398.
1101. THEATRE PRACTICUM
This is a laboratory in acting, stage management, design, construction and handling of 
scenery, lighting, sound, properties, costume and makeup. May be repeated for credit. 
Required each term for Theatre majors.
1103. MOVEMENT FOR THE THEATRE
This is an introduction to the basics of stage movement with exercises in stage movement 
styles (classic Greek and Roman, Shakespearean, Modern and Avant-Garde). Exercises 
in body alignment (discussion of movement problems and injuries) and exercises in 
relaxation technique. Definition and history of one or more of the following: Alexander 
Technique, Laban, Feldenkrais, Yoga and/or Reiki. May be repeated once.
1301. INTRODUCTION TO THE THEATRE I
This is a non-major study of the basic elements of theatre. A basic survey of theatre 
history in the Western world and play analysis are emphasized.
1302. INTRODUCTION TO THE THEATRE II
A non-major introduction to basic scene design, lighting design, and stage directing are 
emphasized. Floor plans, lighting plots, and short, student-directed scenes are required.
2301. ACTING I
This is basic acting with emphasis on play structure, character development, and 
elementary problems of ensemble playing. Memorization and participation in dramatic 
presentations are required. (2-1).
2302. ACTING II
This is the theory and practice of acting. Formal and informal performance of scenes 
throughout the semester will be included. 
instructor.
3301. THEATRE HISTORY I
This is a study of theatre history which traces the path of theatre from its beginnings 
through the Renaissance. Emphasis is on the playwrighting, acting and directing styles, 
scenic innovations and theatre architecture of various periods. 
or HIST 1350 or HIST 1351.
3302. THEATRE HISTORY II
This is a historical survey of major trends of world theatre and drama. Emphasis is on 
theatre of Europe and the United States, however, the eastern theatre is covered also. This 
course covers dramatic criticism, theatre trends, actors and acting styles, the role of the 
director, and scenic innovations from the Renaissance to the contemporary theatre of the 
late 20th century. 
3305. CREATIVE DRAMA FOR YOUNG AUDIENCES
This is the theory and practice of creative drama for young audiences including story 
dramatization, storytelling, pantomime, role playing and theatre games. 
3306. COSTUMING
The course is the study of costumes as the clothing and outfits in theatrical production. 
It will include a look of the evolution of clothes over time and across cultures and the 
affect that change has on the aesthetic of theatrical performance. Styles, fashion, and 
construction technique as well as costume’s role in a theatrical narrative are discussed. 
The designing and building of costumes for theatre play a central part in this course. 

4325. DIRECTING AND MANAGEMENT FOR STAGE
The course focuses on the skills and insights unique to the Stage Director and Stage 
Manager and will cover: script interpretation, communicating with actors, designers, 
other team members, blocking, and running the rehearsal and performance process. The 
course is structured to prepare theatre students for leadership roles within the production 
team. 
4333. PLAYWRIGHTING
This is the study and practice of writing plays of various lengths. Use of dialogue, 
movement and building of ideas into dramatic situations is emphasized. 
ENGL 1302 or THRE 1301, 2301 and Junior standing.
4340. DRAMATIC LITERATURE
This course includes readings in American, British, and Continental literature, with 
emphasis on the development of ideas, themes, and motifs. 
and either 2340 or 2341 and junior standing, or consent of instructor.
4350. DESIGNING FOR THE STAGE
This is an in-depth study of different aspects of technical theatre including; stage design, 
stage lighting, costume history and design, and/or stage management. This course is 
designed for the upper level theatre major who has special interest in technical aspects 
of theatre and theatre design. 
consent of the theatre director.
4351. ACTING STYLES AND CHARACTERIZATIONS
This is an advanced study into performance aspects of theatre including; advanced 
acting and acting styles, stage directing, play analysis, dramatic criticism and scoring. 

theatre director.
4370. TOPICS IN THEATRE
This course focuses on theatrical styles and genre; dramatic theory and criticism; and 
historical perspectives on world theatre practices. Topics for study include: Musical 
Theatre, Stage Directing: Techniques and Theories, and Post Modern Theatre: The Avant 
Garde from Absurdism to Performance Art. 
consent of instructor.
4380. DIRECTED STUDY IN THEATRE
Subjects not offered as regular courses may be investigated by directed study pursuant 
to a plan proposed by the student and approved before registration by the supervising 
instructor and the appropriate division chair. Normally students enrolling will have 
upper-level status, a 2.0 GPA, and completed basic discipline courses. May be repeated 
with a change in topic.
4398. INTERNSHIP IN THEATRE
Students will serve internship hours at the Schreiner University Theatre or other local 
theatres. The students will be active in a variety of technical theatre activities, which 
may include; set painting, construction, lighting, stage managing, sound, costumes, and 
assistant to the director. 
UNIVERSITY STUDIES (UNIV)
0101. UNIVERSITY STUDIES
This is a course designed to increase knowledge, skills and self awareness required by 
college freshmen to be successful in their first year of college and beyond. Required of 
all freshmen and graded S/U. Does not earn credit hours nor satisfy degree requirements.
VOCATIONAL NURSING (VONR) 
1101. PERSONAL/VOCATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
This introduction to vocational nursing, includes information on vocational organizations, 
licensure, and publications. It guides the student in the development of a philosophy 
of nursing and provides and overview of legal, ethical and cultural issues confronting 
nurses today.
1102. NUTRITION/DIET THERAPY
This course introduces principles of good nutrition as related to health in all age groups. 
The importance of good nutrition, essential nutrients, and diet planning are emphasized. 
This course examines the use of various hospital diets in the treatment regimen of 
the patient.
1103. FUNDAMENTALS OF MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION
This course in the second semester will prepare students to begin the important nursing 
responsibility of giving medications to their assigned patients. The focus will be on 
oral and parenteral routes of administration. Dosage calculations will also be a major 
component of this course to prepare students to give medications.
1105. NORMAL GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
This course introduces the student to aspects of growth and development from infancy to 
the elderly. Emphasis is placed on using principles of normal growth and development to 
enhance nursing care for the patient as a whole.
1106. MENTAL HEALTH/MENTAL ILLNESS
This course covers the basic principles of positive mental health as well as general aspects 
of psychiatric nursing care. Topics include: personality development, human emotions 
and behaviors, defense mechanisms, stress and the coping process, and the history of 
mental illness. Nursing care of the patient with mental illness will include discussion of 
various psychiatric conditions and various treatment modalities.
1107. ADVANCED NURSING SKILLS
This skills course will be taught in the third semester. The focus will be on more advanced 
nursing skills such as Intravenous Therapy. The students will have opportunity to develop 
these skills in the lab setting as well as in acute care areas. Included will be other advanced 
skills, such as caring for patients with chest tubes.
1108. PSYCHIATRIC NURSING (CLINICAL)
This course is the clinical component to the Mental Health/Mental Illness course taught 
in the third semester. Students will have opportunity to work with patients having mental 
disorders as well as addictive disorders and behaviors. Clinical sites are area facilities 
which specialize in the special care needs of these patients. Graded S/U.
1201. MATERNITY NURSING AND CARE OF THE NEWBORN
This course will focus on the normal child-bearing process from pregnancy through labor 
and delivery and the post-partum period. Complications as well as the impact of these 
for both mother and baby will be covered. Care of the normal newborn is also included 
in this course.
1202. PEDIATRIC NURSING
This course provides the student with the understanding of how illness and hospitalization 
affect the child and his family. Emphasis is placed on common pediatric diseases and the 
nursing implications of each.
1203. GERIATRIC NURSING
This course introduces the student to theories of the aging process, examines special care 
needs of the geriatric patient with an emphasis on the nursing process in understanding 
the pathological variations of aging.
1301. CARE OF THE GERIATRIC PATIENT (CLINICAL)
This course is the clinical practice segment to correlate our Geriatric Nursing course. 
Students will begin using the long term care areas to focus on using the nursing process 
to identify nursing care needs of the elderly adult. They will also begin developing 
nursing care plans to prepare for clinical hands-on experiences to assist in meeting these 
needs to assigned patients. It will also incorporate medication administration and nursing 
responsibilities to designated patients. Graded S/U.
1302.  FUNDAMENTALS OF MATERNAL –  
CHILD HEALTH NURSING (CLINICAL)
This course is the clinical practice segment to correlate our Maternity Nursing and 
Pediatric Nursing courses taught in the second semester. The hospital setting will be used 
to focus on the needs of the child-bearing families. Students will continue to utilize the 
nursing process in planning nursing care to both new mothers and their infants. For the 
pediatric experience a variety of community based clinical sites–the Ambulatory Care 
Center, Kerrville ISD schools, pediatricians’ offices as well as the hospital setting will be 
used. Graded S/U.
1401.  FUNDAMENTALS OF VOCATIONAL NURSING 
(CLINICAL)
Clinical practice for the first semester focuses on giving students opportunities to begin 
to develop basic nursing skills in patient care settings. Students begin their direct patient 
care in the long-term care facilities. This slower pace also allows students the benefit of 
developing good assessment skills which will assist them as they continue their nursing 
experience. Graded S/U.
1402. BODY STRUCTURE/FUNCTION
This course provides the student information regarding to normal structure and function 
of the human body from the cellular level to that of body systems. Provides a foundation 
for Nursing Skills, Medical-Surgical Nursing and Maternal-Child Nursing.
1403. PHARMACOLOGY
This course introduces basic drug classifications and examines drug side effects and 
nursing implications of specific drug therapy.
1501. BASIC NURSING SKILLS
This course is designed to introduce the beginning nursing student to a wide variety 
of basic nursing skills. It is the foundation course of nursing. Emphasis is placed on 
the utilization of scientific concepts and principles as a guide in developing competence 
in the performance of these skills. Included is material related to disease control and 
prevention. The nursing process is the foundation on which classroom and laboratory 
activities are based.
1503. CARE OF THE ADULT PATIENT (CLINICAL)
This clinical course correlates with our Advanced Nursing Skills and Medical/Surgical 
Nursing courses. The acute hospital setting provides the opportunities for our students to 
further develop their hands-on clinical skills as well as to enhance their practice and skill 
in using the nursing process in the fast-paced nursing environment. In addition to the 
medical/surgical units, students will have rotations through doctors’ offices and special 
care units such as the emergency room, intensive care units, operation rooms and post-
anesthesia care unit. Graded S/U.
1601. MEDICAL/SURGICAL NURSING
This course builds on the knowledge of the healthy human body. The goal is first to 
achieve an understanding of the disease processes in nursing situations. It will focus 
on problem-solving with the use of the nursing process. The course will also cover the 
care of the adult patient with acute medical/surgical conditions. It will emphasize both 
pathophysiology and psychosocial aspects of patient care needs. Topics will also include 
patient teaching, discharge planning, nutritional and pharmacological considerations. 
