ACCT203.  Principles of Accounting I (3).  
An introduction to financial accounting  Coverage includes 
understanding the business, processing transactions through 
the accounting cycle, preparing financial statements, and 
measuring and evaluating financial performance  Fall, 
 
 
ACCT204.  Principles of Accounting II (3).  
A continuation of the study of accounting principles.  This 
course emphasizes the usage of managerial accounting 
concepts.  Coverage includes job-order costing, activity-
based costing, process, costing, cost-volume-profit 
relationships, differential analysis, master budgeting, 
flexible budgets and variance analysis. (Prerequisite: 
ACCT203). Fall,  
 
ACCT225.   Accounting Information Technology (3). 
This course introduces accounting software and related 
applications. Students learn to set up and operate various 
software. They will complete the accounting cycle and use 
the technology to prepare financial and managerial reports. 
Current 
software 
includes 
Quickbooks 
and 
Excel. 
(Prerequisite: ACCT203) 
 
ACCT299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ACCT301.  Intermediate Accounting I (3).  
A detailed study of financial accounting and statement 
presentation, including the application of accounting theory 
and use of authoritative resources. Topics include the 
accounting system, revenue recognition, and short term, 
long term and intangible assets.  There will be a research 
component and an emphasis on professional responsibilities 
and ethical standards.  
(Prerequisite: ACCT204). Fall. 
 
ACCT302.  Intermediate Accounting II (3). 
A detailed study of financial accounting and statement 
presentation, including the application of accounting theory 
and use of authoritative resources.  Topics include financial 
instruments, liabilities, shareholders equity and earnings per 
share.  There will be a research component and an emphasis 
on professional responsibilities and ethical standards. 
(Prerequisite: ACCT301).  
 
ACCT 311.  Managerial Cost Accounting (3). 
A detailed study of managerial accounting building on the 
foundational concepts learned in ACCT 204.  Includes cost 
concepts and behavior, job costing, process costing, activity-
based costing, cost analysis and estimation, budgeting, and 
performance measurement.  Coverage emphasizes using 
Excel-based 
decisions 
in 
managerial 
accounting.  
(Prerequisite: ACCT204). Fall. 
 
 
ACCT313.  Federal Income Tax Accounting- 
Individuals and Sole Proprietors (3).  
Study of tax theory and application of federal tax laws for 
individuals and sole proprietors.  Topics include gross 
income and expenses, itemized deductions, tax credits, 
depreciation, and capital gains and losses. This course will 
require tax return preparation and a research component. 
(Prerequisite: ACCT204). Fall. 
 
ACCT350.  Topics in Accountancy (3).  
In-depth theoretical and practical coverage of accounting 
concepts in a specialized area, with emphasis on use of the 
conceptual knowledge in planning and problem solving. 
Topics may include but are not limited to: advanced cost 
accounting, current issues involving ethics, health care 
accounting and corporate controllership. May be repeated 
with a different topic. (Prerequisite: permission of 
instructor). Offered as needed. 
 
ACCT399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ACCT412.  Auditing (3).  
A detailed study of the audit environment and the financial 
statement 
audit, 
including 
professional 
standards, 
engagement planning, risk assessment and internal control 
evaluation, audit procedures, completion of the audit, and 
reporting.  Coverage also includes professional ethics and an 
overview of sampling techniques. (Prerequisite: ACCT302). 
 
 
ACCT414.  Accounting Systems & Controls (3).  
The study of essential elements and activities in an 
accounting information system, including how information 
flows through the various accounting cycles.  The course 
will emphasis the appropriate internal controls and risk 
assessment to ensure quality of financial information and 
prevention of fraud and theft.  (Prerequisite: ACCT204). 
Fall. 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
190 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
 
ACCT416.  Advanced and Nonprofit Accounting (3).  
The study, analysis and recording of high-level, complex 
accounting transactions and business events, and related 
financial reporting for consolidated corporate groups, other 
business-entity combinations, partnerships, foreign business 
activities, governmental, non-profits, estates and trusts in 
accordance with FASB, GASB, and IFRS.  SEC regulations 
and reporting requirements are also surveyed.  (Prerequisite: 
ACCT302). Fall. 
 
ACCT451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business department). 
 
ACCT499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Art History (AHIS) 
 
AHIS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
AHIS200.  Global Art History (3) 
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN). 
Course that surveys art and architecture of Africa, Asia, 
Southeast Asia, pre-Columbian Americas, and the Middle 
East.  Fall. 
 
 
AHIS201.  Western Art History I: Prehistory through  
Medieval (3) (HUMANITIES). 
First of two courses surveying 40,000 years of Western art 
history, including Prehistoric, ancient Greece and Rome, 
ancient Jewish and Christian, Byzantine, and Medieval art. 
(Prerequisite: CCC101).  Every other  
 
AHIS202.  Western Art History II: Renaissance 
through Contemporary (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Second of two courses surveying 40,000 years of Western 
art history, including Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, 
Neoclassicism, Romanticism, 19th and 20th Century Modern, 
and Contemporary art. (Prerequisite: CCC101).  Every other 
 
 
AHIS232.   Representations of Gender in Art (3) 
(HUMANITIES).    
An introduction to gender theories in art.  Examines 
connections between art, visual culture, gender, and sexual 
identities.  Every other Fall.  
 
AHIS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
AHIS301.  Topics in Art History (3).    
In-depth study of topics in various fields and periods of art 
history Topics may include contemporary theory, visual 
culture studies, Native American Art, and Arts of the United 
States Course can be repeated with different topics.  
Offered as needed. 
 
AHIS303.  Fortification to Reformation: The History of  
York, England to the 15th Century (6). 
A five-week interdisciplinary course centered on York 
Minster. Readings/lectures cover Roman York, York and 
Northumbria, 
Anglo-Saxon 
York, 
Viking/Anglo 
Scandinavian York, Norman York, Late Medieval York, 
Reformation York, and beyond. Includes response papers, a 
10-page research project, a service learning experience with 
a reflection journal, and excursions to significant sites. May 
not be repeated for credit. (Prerequisite: Study Abroad 
Application Process). May, Summer. 
 
AHIS333.  Gay and Lesbian Art History (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Course examines important artists, traditions, and events in 
Gay and Lesbian Art History in the United States and 
Europe.  Key concepts and theories include censorship, 
subjectivity, art activism, queer theory, and the visual 
rhetoric strategies used by gay and lesbian artists. Every 
other  
 
AHIS334.  Photography and Identity (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
This course explores the rhetorical functions of photography 
in the construction of social identities in the works of 
photography and popular visual media.  Feminist, queer, 
race, semiotic, and rhetoric theories will serve as critical 
frames for examining the development and changes within 
these media. Every other  
 
AHIS335.  Architectural Studies (3) (HUMANITIES). 
This course examines aesthetic theories and canon of 
Western architecture through a close reading of primary 
source literature, analysis of contemporary scholarship, and 
engagement in a service learning project. Every other Fall. 
 
AHIS336.  History of Modern Art (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Course explores art in Europe and the United States from the 
early 19th to the first quarter of the 20th century, including 
major ideas such as avant-garde, autonomy, commodity, and 
“Modernism”. (Prerequisite: one prior AHIS course). Fall. 
 
AHIS337.  Contemporary Art History (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Movements and artists significant in the 20th and 21st 
centuries in the visual arts are studied. Careful attention 
given to key philosophical, theoretical, social and  
Course Descriptions 
 
191 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
historical 
influences, 
especially 
to 
ideas 
such 
as 
“Postmodernism,” identity, and the body. (Prerequisite: one 
prior AHIS course).  
 
AHIS339.  Art History: Reacting to the Past (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Students will play one art history Reacting to the Past game 
and write research papers on topics informed by the game 
experience. Every other Fall. 
 
AHIS340.  Native American Art History (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN). 
This course examines Native American visual art and 
cultural objects from prehistory through the 21st century, 
critical issues concerning Native American visual arts, and 
representations of Native Americans in United States 
visual culture.  (Prerequisite: One prior AHIS course or 
permission of  instructor). 
 
AHIS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
 
AHIS401.  Professional Studies in Art  History (3). 
Advanced studies in art history including research, museum 
work, 
curriculum 
development 
and/or 
conference 
presentation.  Students devise and execute a professional 
project such as a research paper, lesson plan, museum 
display or service learning. (Prerequisites: two prior AHIS 
courses). Offered as needed. 
 
AHIS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Intended for Art History minors with a special need to study 
content beyond that offered in the normal course sequence. 
(Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
AHIS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Art (ART) 
 
ART100.  Three-Dimensional Design (3) (ARTS).  
Studio.  The principles of organization in a variety of three-
dimensional media, with emphasis on problem solving and 
the fundamentals of design. Fall,  
 
ART101.  Two-Dimensional Design (3) (ARTS).    
Studio,  Design elements, principles, processes and media in 
two dimensions, in a variety of visual concepts in both black 
and white and color.  Fall,  
 
ART102.  Digital Foundations (3) (ARTS). 
Studio.  An introduction to the computer and industry  
standard software including Adobe Creative Suite.  Students 
create a variety of digital images while applying creative 
solutions to design problems.  Students will explore 
challenges and advantages of making art with a computer.  
Emphasis placed on developing creative thought processes 
and personal expression.  Fall,  
 
ART103.  Drawing from Life (3) (ARTS).  
Emphasizes developing drawing, design and technical skills 
in a variety of black and white media by working from real 
objects and models in the studio Fall.  
 
ART105.   Art for Elementary Teachers (3).  
The development of  familiarity  with  various  materials  and  
techniques  for use in the elementary classroom, working in 
paper-maché, mosaic, crayon, chalk, paint, basic printing 
processes and clay. (Open only to students pursuing the 
planned minor in elementary education or the early 
childhood minor). Fall. 
 
ART106.  Introduction to Ceramics (3) (ARTS).  
Basic ceramic methods for the non-art major, including 
construction techniques and wheel throwing. Consideration 
will be given to three-dimensional design elements and 
ideas.  Fall,  
 
ART199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
ART201.  Painting Foundations (3) (ARTS). 
Studio.  Practice painting as a creative process employing 
drawing, design, color, and image.  Emphasizes 
foundations, acrylic technique, structured experimentation, 
and organizing two-dimensional surface for successful 
composition and expression.  Introduces historical and 
contemporary painting and its conceptual foundations as 
these relate to students’ work.  (Prerequisite: ART101 or 
ART103 or permission of instructor).  Fall. 
 
ART202.  Painting Traditions (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. Gain experience with oil paint; compare strengths  
of oils and acrylics to choose best for each student.  Practice 
alla prima painting and painting from life in addition to 
abstraction and contemporary approaches.  Research 
historical and contemporary painting as these relate to 
students’ work. (Prerequisite: ART101 or ART103 or 
permission of instructor).  
 
ART203.  Non-Acid Intaglio Printmaking (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. Non-acid intaglio techniques on Plexiglas and metal 
etching plates, manipulation of point and crible´ textures and 
vocabulary of nontraditional techniques. Creation of images 
using collage-based collagraph plates.    (Prerequisite: 
ART101, ART102 or ART103, or permission of instructor). 
Course Descriptions 
 
192 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
ART204.  Relief Printmaking (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. Work in basic woodcut and linoleum printing 
techniques. (Prerequisite: ART101, ART102 or ART103, or 
permission of instructor).   
 
 
ART205.  Ceramics- Hand Building (3) (ARTS). 
Studio.  Introduction to ceramics hand building techniques.  
Skills explored will include basic hand constructed 
sculptures and vessels, experimentation with decorating and 
various firing techniques. (Prerequisite: ART100 or 
permission of instructor). Fall. 
 
ART206.  Ceramics-Wheel Throwing (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. Introduction to the potter’s wheel as a creative tool.  
Skills explored will include basic wheel thrown forms, 
experimentation with decorating and various firing 
techniques.  (Prerequisite: ART100 or permission of 
instructor).   
 
ART209.  Weaving & Fiber Construction (3) (ARTS).  
Studio. The basic techniques of four-harness loom weaving 
and various methods of designing and constructing forms 
with fibers, including tapestry. Alternates with ART210. 
Open to freshmen.   Fall. 
 
ART210.  Textile Design (3) (ARTS).  
Studio.  The decoration of fabric surfaces by means of dye 
and pigment, with special emphasis on design in the shibori, 
batik and screen-printing methods. Alternates with ART209. 
Open to freshmen.  Fall. 
 
ART215.  Beginning Photography (3) (ARTS).  
Studio. Learn camera operation, digital image editing and 
skills to improve as a photographer.  While refining 
technical skills, there is also an emphasis on developing 
aesthetic sensitivity and appreciation of the medium as a 
potent vehicle for communication.  Fall,  
 
ART219.  Typography (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. An introduction to lettering skills and the history and 
foundation 
of 
letterforms. 
 
Students 
explore 
the 
fundamentals of typography through typographic history, 
tools, terminology and techniques.  Students learn to 
recognize and analyze basic letterforms while exploring the 
uses of contemporary typesetting tools. (Prerequisite: 
ART102 or permission of instructor). Fall. 
 
ART220.  Sculpture I (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. A continuation of the media presented in ART100 
with a focus on sculpture.  New techniques and media 
presented may include, woodcarving, earthwork, glass 
casting, welding, life casting, assemblage, or paper 
sculpture.  The class will culminate in a significant 
independent project. (Prerequisite: ART100 or permission 
of instructor). 
 
ART228.  Introduction to Graphic Design (3) (ARTS). 
Studio.  An introduction to the fundamentals and history of 
graphic design.  Students generate concepts and effective 
communication within the context of graphic design using 
industry standard software.  Topics include page layout, 
creation of logos, use of text and graphics, printing and 
postproduction, basic digital processes. (Prerequisite: 
ART102 or permission of instructor).  
 
ART250.  Drawing & Illustration (3) (ARTS). 
Studio. Continued exploration of perceptual and expressive 
drawing, utilizing a variety of technical means and media, 
including 
color 
drawing 
and 
illustration 
projects. 
(Prerequisite: ART103 or permission of instructor). 
 
ART290.  Sophomore Art & Design Career  
Seminar (1).  
This class will involve field trips or speakers, research and 
self-evaluation. With a variety of artists, discuss the issues 
of being an art and design professional. Documentation of 
artwork, 
portfolio/resume 
preparation, 
gallery 
and 
exhibition experiences appropriate to the students’ possible 
career directions 
will be identified and initiated. 
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor).  Fall.  
 
ART299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ART301.  Advanced Painting (3).  
Studio. Continuing study of oil and/or acrylic painting, with 
increasing focus on the development of the student’s unique 
personal aesthetic.  Attention paid to conceptual foundations 
of a student’s work.  Customized research assignments. 
(Prerequisite: ART201, ART202 or ART250, or permission 
of instructor). 
 
ART303.  Figure Studies (3).  
Studio. Students draw and model in clay from figure and 
costume models.  Course includes color drawing and a self-
directed unit in student’s focus medium (drawing, painting, 
sculpture, more). (Prerequisite: ART103 or ART250; prior 
completion of ART205 is preferred). 
 
ART305.  Advanced Ceramics - Vessels (3).  
Studio. An advanced studio course including techniques for 
creating ceramics vessels.  Scale, multiples, basic clay and 
glaze formulation, and more in depth understanding of 
technique, practice critique, and the field at large will be 
Course Descriptions 
 
193 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
gained. (Prerequisite: ART205 or ART 206 or permission of 
instructor).  
 
ART306.  Advanced Ceramics – Sculpture (3). 
Studio. An advanced course outlining techniques for 
creating more involved and intricate sculpturally based 
ceramic works.  Scale, multiples, basic clay and glaze 
formulation, and more in depth understanding of technique, 
practice critique, and the field at large will be gained. 
(Prerequisite: ART205 or ART206, or permission of 
instructor). 
 
ART315.  Intermediate Photography (3).  
Studio. This course begins by exploring the craftsmanship 
of black and white, film based darkroom photography.  
Students will use multiple camera formats, including further 
digital camera work, to experience a variety of creative 
tools.  In addition, this course continues to study the 
aesthetics of the photographic image. (Prerequisite: 
ART215 or permission of instructor). 
 
ART319.  Front End Web Design (3).  
Students will learn web design process, audience analysis, 
user interface design, and responsive design utilizing Raster 
and Vector imaging software and Muse to create websites.  
Emphasis on Typography and Grid use of Web.  
(Prerequisite: ART102). 
 
ART320.  Sculpture II (3).  
Studio. Students develop a personal direction selected from 
experience with previous media and techniques and based 
on personal imagery and theoretical research. A series of 
works demonstrating a unique personal vision will be 
student produced. (Prerequisite: ART220).  Fall. 
 
ART325.  Foundations of Art Therapy (2).  
Introduces foundational theories and traditional approaches 
of art therapy practice, emphasizing the psychodynamic 
roots of the field. Overview of history of the profession and 
examines 
contributions 
of 
key 
pioneers. 
Clinical 
applications are explored through case studies and studio 
experience.  (Prerequisite: PSYC100; prior completion of 
PSYC205 is recommended).   
 
ART326.  Approaches in Art Therapy (2).   
Explores alternative theories and techniques in the field of 
art therapy.  Topics also include group and family art therapy 
practice. Applications are explored through case studies and 
studio 
experience. 
(Prerequisite: 
PSYC100; 
prior 
completion of ART325 and PSYC205 recommended).  
 
ART327.  Community Art Therapy Practicum (1-2). 
Students experience & direct art activities for client 
organization, supervised by art therapist.  Therapist assigns 
readings, research, activity preparation; prepares students 
for work with clients; teaches leading sessions/interacting 
effectively; 
assists 
students 
in 
putting 
their 
observations/experiences into art therapeutic context.  Can 
repeat. (Prerequisite or co-requisite: ART325, ART326 or 
permission of instructor). 
 
 
 
ART328.  Graphic Design II (3). 
This course is a of Graphic Design focusing on page 
layout/production processes.  Designing creatively through 
solving real-world design problems.  Focus on audience 
analysis, problem solving and conceptual thinking. 
(Prerequisites: ART219 and ART228). 
 
ART329.  Video Art (3). 
Studio. In this course students will learn the tools of digital 
video production as a medium for creative expression. 
Students will learn pre-production planning, video 
techniques, lighting, sound, and postproduction editing with 
Final Cut Pro. There is also an emphasis on creative 
collaboration and the challenges of working in groups.  
(Prerequisite:  ART215 or permission of instructor).  
 
ART338.  Graphic Design – Digital Media (3). 
Studio. This course is a continuation and further exploration 
of Graphic Design focusing in interactive and motion 
design.  Students will expand their skills in design through 
creatively solving real-world design problems.  Attention 
and focus is given to problem solving and conceptual 
thinking. 
(Prerequisites: 
ART219 
and 
ART228 
or 
permission of instructor). 
 
ART339.  User Experience I: Understanding User 
Experience (3). 
User Experience (UX) refers to all elements of a customer’s 
interaction with a particular product, and this course will 
focus on UX design for technology products.  Silicon Valley 
companies spend billions of dollars ensuring that technology 
products are intuitive to use.  Students will learn what drives 
product usability, the fundamentals of UX design, and how 
to build wireframes and prototypes.  (Prerequisite: 
ART228). 
 
ART340.  User Experience II: Building Compelling User 
Experiences (3). 
This course builds upon User Experience I and teaches 
students how to build effective user experiences through a 
rigorous process of implementing best practices, testing 
designs and iterating.  This course will also cover topics such 
Course Descriptions 
 
194 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
as branding, color palette, user journeys, and designing for 
multiple platforms.  (Prerequisites: ART228 and ART339). 
 
ART341.  User Experience III: Capstone- Goal Oriented 
Web Design (3). 
There is no substitute for experience.  In this course, students 
will propose and build a new website for an existing 
company.  This website should be optimized to boos 
conversion events for the company in question.  Students 
will need to research customer behavior and industry trends 
to successfully complete this course.  This course will test 
all of the skills a student has built through their Web Design 
major- design, prototyping, optimization and programming.  
(Prerequisites: ART228. ART328, ART339, ART340, 
CS103 and CS110). 
 
ART355.  Advanced Photography & Digital Video (3). 
Studio. Students learn advanced techniques in digital 
photography and digital video as a means for personal 
expression.  Emphasis on producing art using creative 
narrative techniques.  Critical thinking, storytelling, artistic 
voice, and the interplay between artist and viewer will be 
explored. (Prerequisite: ART215 or permission of 
instructor). 
 
ART360.  Methods for Elementary Art Teachers (3).  
Teaching art at the elementary and middle school levels, 
including 
advocacy, 
art 
education 
theory 
and 
interdisciplinary education models.  Teaching and 
organizational challenges of art education and the problems 
of creating an age sensitive curriculum. (Prerequisite: 
acceptance in teacher education program,  junior standing; 
Co-requisite: ART361).  
 
 
ART361.  Elementary Art Practicum (1).  
Field experience teaching art to elementary students. 
 (Co-requisite: 
ART360. 
With 
respect 
to 
teacher 
certification requirements, this can substitute for one hour of 
T ED 300). Spring 
 
ART390.  Senior Art & Design Studio I (3). 
This multidisciplinary studio course is designed for 
advanced study in the student’s medium or media of focus.  
Advanced art theory and practices will be explored as 
students work towards an independently designed body of 
work for their senior exhibition. Fall. (Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor; Co-requisite ART401). 
 
ART391.  Senior Art &Design Studio II (3). 
This multidisciplinary studio course is designed for 
advanced study in the student’s medium or media of focus.  
Advanced art theory and practices will be applied as student 
create an independently designed body of work for their 
senior exhibition. (Prerequisite: permission of instructor; 
Co-requisite ART402).  
 
ART399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ART401.  Senior Career Preparation (2).  
Majors graduating in the Spring, or December of the next 
year, write press releases and design publicity materials.  
They write resumes, artist statements, artist talks, letters of 
application, and pursue other professional practices.   
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor; Co-requisite: 
ART390).  Fall. 
 
ART402.  Senior Exhibition (2). 
Majors graduating in the Spring, or December of the next 
year, prepare exhibitions, install them in the Gallery, write 
press releases, design announcements.  They write resumes, 
artist statements, artist talks, letters of application, and other 
professional practices.  (Prerequisite: permission of 
instructor; Co-requisite: ART391).   
 
ART451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Intended for Art and Design majors with a special need to 
study content beyond that offered in the normal course 
sequence. (Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
 
ART460.  Methods for Secondary Art Educators (3).  
Art education theory, resources and classroom management 
related to secondary teaching.  Development of lesson plans 
into whole units of study culminating in the creation of an 
entire curriculum and a  
written personal philosophy about the teaching of art.  
Additional 
field 
experience 
required. 
(Prerequisite: 
ART360; Co-requisite: ART461). Fall. 
 
ART461.  Secondary Art Practicum (1).  
Field experience teaching art to secondary students.  
(Co-requisite: ART460. With respect to teacher certification 
requirements, this can substitute for one hour of T ED 300). 
Fall. 
 
ART475.  Capstone: Graphic Design Portfolio Prep (3). 
The capstone course in Graphic Design degree.  Covering 
concepts such as portfolio preparation, online portfolio 
development, personal branding, corporate identity, resume 
building, and job search skills in the field of graphic design.  
(Prerequisite: ART328). 
 
ART489.  Senior Research in Art Education (2).  
Classroom discussions about the practices of teaching art.  
Research and reflective writings will prepare the pre-
Course Descriptions 
 
195 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
associate teacher by focusing on teaching diverse learners in 
diverse contexts, is- sues of curriculum and pedagogy, and 
school culture and art teaching.  
(Co-requisite: ART360, ART460, or T ED400).  
 
 
ART499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courses in Art 
 Management (ARTM) 
 
ARTM101. 
Foundations in the Arts, Cultural, and 
Creative Industries (3) (ART) 
Focusing on the needs of the arts, cultural and creative 
industries, basic principles related to organizations in the 
arts industry are covered with foundations in 
management and leadership, planning, organizational 
mission, vision and values statements, program planning 
and evaluation, financial management and budgets, and 
marketing and audience development. 
 
ARTM199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
 
ARTM200. 
Non-Profits and the Arts, Cultural, 
and Creative Industries (3) 
Focusing on the needs of non-profits, principles in 
organizational structures, governance and the board of 
directors, personnel and volunteer management, 
fundraising, community engagement and education, and 
legislative advocacy with application in the arts, cultural, 
and creative industries are covered.(Prerequisite: 
ARTM101) 
 
ARTM299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ARTM350. 
Grant writing (3) 
A hands-on approach to grant writing from locating 
potential fund sources to grant submission. Students will 
focus on the mechanics of proposal development and 
writing with attention to the political and social aspects. 
Special attention to the needs of non-profit organizations. 
(Prerequisite:  ARTM200) 
 
ARTM399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
Provides an experiential learning opportunity with an 
operational arts organization.  Involves direct experience 
in management of an arts organization, emphasis on 
leadership, advocacy, marketing, facility management, 
event planning, and audience development.  
(Prerequisite: ARTM300). 
 
 
ARTM400.  Capstone (3). 
Create an event plan that expands work begun during the 
internship and culminates in a public presentation.  
Demonstrate ability to manage, produce literature and/or 
material, fundraise, and execute events that foster 
cultural literacy and arts appreciation.  
(Prerequisite: ARTM399). 
 
ARTM451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
 
ARTM499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Athletic Training (AT) 
 
AT100.   Medical Terminology (2). 
Medical terms will be translated by learning the meanings 
of suffixes, prefixes and finally the word root. This 
medical terminology course will provide the medical 
language needed to advance to graduate program in the 
health sciences. (Prerequisite: CCC101). 
 
AT200.   Pathology of Injury and Illness (3). 
The study of injuries and illnesses commonly observed in 
the physically active as well as the processes of the body 
in an injured or diseased state.  (Prerequisite: Pre-Athletic 
Training major, Co-requisite: ESAT225). 
 
 AT300.   Introduction to Pharmacology (3). 
This 
course 
convers 
fundamental 
concepts 
of 
pharmacology 
inducing 
pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics, and toxicology.  (Prerequisite: 
completion of one CHEM course). 
 
AT301.   AT Seminar I (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course.  Using contemporary topics in 
health care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  
(Co-requisite: AT501). 
 
AT302.   AT Seminar II (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course.  Using contemporary topics in 
Course Descriptions 
 
196 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
health care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  
(Co-requisite: AT502). 
 
 
AT303.   AT Seminar III (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course.  Using contemporary topics in 
health care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  
(Co-requisite: AT503). 
 
AT304.   AT Seminar IV (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course.  Using contemporary topics in 
health care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  
(Co-requisite: AT504). 
 
Graduate level Courses in  
Athletic Training (AT) 
 
AT500.  The Practicing Athletic Trainer (2).  
Students will learn the legal and ethical standards of 
practice as well as the foundations of patient centered 
care, inter-professional collaboration, evidence based 
practice, quality improvement, health care informatics. 
(Prerequisite: Entrance into the Graduate Program in 
Athletic Training). 
 
AT501.  AT Clinical Skills I (1).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
Entrance into the Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT501L.  AT Seminar I (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course. Using contemporary topics in health 
care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  (Co-
requisite: AT501) 
 
AT502.  AT Clinical Skills II (2).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
AT501). 
 
AT502L.  AT Seminar II (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course. Using contemporary topics in health 
care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  (Co-
requisite:  AT502) 
 
AT503.  AT Clinical Skills III (2).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
AT502). 
 
AT503L.  AT Seminar III (1). 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course. Using contemporary topics in health 
care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization.  (Co-
requisite:  AT503) 
 
AT504.  AT Clinical Skills IV (2).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
AT503). 
 
AT504L.  AT Seminar IV (1) 
This course supplements the associated athletic training 
clinical skills course. Using contemporary topics in health 
care, emphasis will be placed on interpersonal 
communication and professional socialization. (Co-
requisite:  AT504) 
 
AT505.  AT Clinical Skills V (2).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
AT504). 
 
AT506.  AT Clinical Skills VI (4).  
Students will be assigned to an approved clinical site and 
preceptor to gain practical clinical experience. Clinical 
skills previously taught will be assessed.  (Prerequisite: 
AT505). 
 
AT510.  Strength and Conditioning (3).   
This course integrates the application of scientific 
principles, concepts, and theories of exercise to improve 
the condition of the physically active.  (Prerequisite: 
Entrance into the Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT520.  Research Methods (3).  
Prepares students to utilize the best available evidence and 
procedures to perform research and drive clinical practice. 
Emphasis will be placed on ethics, formulation of a 
research question, design, data collection,  analysis and 
Course Descriptions 
 
197 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
results presentation.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT521.  Prevention and Pre-Hospital Care I (1).   
Students will learn to prevent, recognize and manage 
acute injuries and illnesses in order to provide optimal 
initial care and support return to activity. This course also 
covers 
basic 
emergency incident 
management and 
understanding of their role and responsibilities within the 
EMS system.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the Graduate 
Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: AT521-L). 
 
AT521-L.  Prevention and Pre-Hospital Care I Lab 
(1).  
Students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT521.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: 
AT521). 
 
AT522.  Prevention and Pre-Hospital Care II (1).   
Students will learn to prevent, recognize and manage 
acute injuries 
and illnesses 
in 
order 
to 
provide 
optimal initial care and support return to activity. 
This course 
also 
covers 
basic 
emergency incident 
management and 
understanding 
of 
their 
role and 
responsibilities within the EMS system.  (Prerequisite: 
AT521 and AT521-L, Co-requisite: AT522-L).  
 
AT522-L.  Prevention and Pre-Hospital Care II Lab 
(1).  
Building on content learned in Pre-Hospital Care I Lab, 
students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT522.  (Prerequisite: AT521 and 
AT521-L, Co-requisite: AT522). 
 
AT530.  Athletic Training Administration (3).   
Students will learn to set policies and perform 
administrative duties related to the management of 
physical, human, and financial resources in the delivery of 
health care services. (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT531.  Examination and Diagnosis I (2).  
 This course covers essential knowledge for performing a 
medical history and physical examination, establishing a 
plan of care, documentation, referral and return to activity 
considerations.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the Graduate 
Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: AT531-L). 
 
AT531-L.  Examination and Diagnosis I Lab (1). 
Students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT531.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: 
AT531). 
 
AT532.  Examination and Diagnosis II (2).  
 Building on content learned in Examination & Diagnosis 
I, this course covers essential knowledge for performing a 
medical history and physical examination, establishing a 
plan of care, documentation, referral and return to activity 
considerations.  (Prerequisite: AT531 and AT531-L, Co-
requisite: AT532-L). 
 
AT532-L.  Examination and Diagnosis II Lab (1). 
Building on content learned in Examination & Diagnosis 
Lab I, students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT532.  Prerequisite: AT531 and AT531-
L, Co-requisite: AT532). 
 
AT533.  Examination and Diagnosis III (2).  
 Building on content learned in Examination & Diagnosis 
II, this course covers essential knowledge for performing 
a medical history and physical examination, establishing 
a plan of care, documentation, referral and return to 
activity considerations.  (Prerequisite: AT532 and AT532-
L, Co-requisite: AT533-L). 
 
AT533-L.  Examination and Diagnosis III Lab (1). 
Building on content learned in Examination & Diagnosis 
Lab II, students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT533.  (Prerequisite: AT532 and 
AT532-L, Co-requisite: AT533). 
 
AT540.  Mental and Behavioral Health (3). 
Introduction to the fundamentals of mental illness and 
psychiatric disorders, as well as  factors that cause mental 
illness and influence patient outcomes. Students will learn 
to identify, refer, and give support to patients with such 
conditions.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the Graduate 
Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT541.  Therapeutic Interventions I (2).  
The essential knowledge regarding treatment and 
rehabilitation of common injuries and illnesses in the 
physically active. Students will assess patients in order to  
establish a plan of care and implement a therapeutic 
intervention program.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: 
AT541-L). 
 
AT541-L.  Therapeutic Interventions I Lab (1).  
Students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT541.  (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training, Co-requisite: 
AT541). 
Course Descriptions 
 
198 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
AT542.  Therapeutic Interventions II (2).  
The essential knowledge regarding treatment and 
rehabilitation of common injuries and illnesses in the 
physically active. Students will assess patients in order to  
establish a plan of care and implement a therapeutic 
intervention program.  (Prerequisite: AT300, AT541 and  
AT541-L, Co-requisite: AT542-L; AT300 can also be 
taken as a co-requisite ). 
 
AT542-L.  Therapeutic Interventions II Lab (1).  
Students will learn and practice the clinical skills 
associated with AT542.  (Prerequisite: AT541 and  
AT541-L, Co-requisite: AT542). 
 
 
AT543.  Therapeutic Interventions III (2).  
The essential knowledge regarding treatment and 
rehabilitation of common injuries and illnesses in the 
physically active. Students will assess patients in order to  
establish a plan of care and implement a therapeutic 
intervention program.  (Prerequisite: AT542 and  
AT542-L, Co-requisite: AT543-L). 
 
AT543-L.  Therapeutic Interventions III Lab (1).  
Students will learn and practice the clinical skills associated 
with AT543.  (Prerequisite: AT542 and  
AT542-L, Co-requisite: AT543). 
 
AT550.   Emergency Medical Services (5). 
This course prepares students to perform as competent 
emergency medical services (EMS) providers. Emphasis is 
placed on roles and responsibilities of the EMS provider, 
scene management, triage, patient assessment and 
treatment of medical emergencies.  (Prerequisite: Entrance 
into the Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT551.  Independent Study (1-3). 
A program of supervised work in an area of special interest 
to the student Graduate students may take up to three 
credits toward graduation This course may be used as 
elective credit, but may not be used in place of required 
courses. 
 
AT560.   Exam Prep (1). 
A preparation course for the athletic training Board of 
Certification Exam. 
 
AT590.  Advanced Topics in Athletic Training (1-3). 
This course will cover contemporary topics  in athletic 
training and related fields. (Prerequisite: Entrance into the 
Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT595.  Capstone: Thesis I (4).  
This is the first of two-course sequence.  Under the direction 
of a faculty chair, students will design original research and 
begin writing a thesis manuscript. (Prerequisite: Entrance 
into the Graduate Program in Athletic Training). 
 
AT596.  Capstone: Thesis II (4). 
This is the second of a two-course sequence.  Under the 
direction of a faculty chair, students will design and 
implement original research and complete a thesis 
manuscript.  (Prerequisite: AT595). 
 
 
Courses in Biology (BIOL) 
 
BIOL101.  Biology and Society (4) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
A general biology course for non-science majors. Selected 
topics ranging from the level of the cell to the biosphere are 
covered. Does not count towards Biology elective credit for 
Biology majors or minors. Three hours of lecture and two 
hours of laboratory per week. Fall. 
 
BIOL101L.  Biology and Society Lab  
Laboratory exercises and experiments designed to illustrate 
principles discussed in BIOL101. (Co-requisite: BIOL101) 
Fall   
 
 
BIOL103.  Plant Biology (4) (NATURAL SCIENCE). 
The study of the morphology, anatomy, development, 
metabolism, physiology, classification, genetics, and 
evolution of plants, bacteria and fungi. Three hours of 
lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Fall. 
 
BIOL104.  Animal Biology (4).  
Primary emphasis is on the structure, development and 
physiology of animals. Their genetics and ecology are also 
examined. Three hours of lecture, two hours of laboratory 
per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL101 or BIOL103).  
 
BIOL130.  Local Flora (3).  
A field course dealing with collection, identification and 
classification of wild flowers and trees of Michigan and 
other designated areas. Offered as needed. 
 
BIOL199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
BIOL203.  Histology (3) 
This combined lecture and laboratory course covers the 
identification of cells, tissues, and organs. Basic concepts 
and principles will be applied towards microanatomy and 
Course Descriptions 
 
199 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
the identification of specific histological structures. Three 
hours lecture. (Prerequisite: BIOL104) 
 
BIOL209.  Human Nutrition (3).  
The fundamentals of nutrition and their applications in 
meeting nutritional needs during the life span.  Emphasis is 
on the functions of essential food elements, health and the 
adequacy of dietary patterns. Does not count toward Biology 
elective credit for Biology majors or minors. (Prerequisite: 
BIOL101, BIOL103, or BIOL104).  
 
BIOL212.  Vertebrate Zoology (4).  
A survey of the major classes of vertebrates, including 
anatomy, behavior, ecology, distribution and taxonomy. 
Three hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite: BIOL101 or BIOL104). Fall. 
 
BIOL217.  Principles of Ecology (3).  
The structure and function of living systems, including 
patterns of relationship between organisms and their 
environment. The study begins with populations and builds 
to the level of ecosystems and the biosphere. Three hours of 
lecture per week. See BIOL218 for a related laboratory 
experience. The lab is required for students pursing a 
Bachelor of Science or is an Environmental Science major. 
(Prerequisites: MATH101 and a 100 level BIOL or ESS 
course). Fall. 
 
BIOL218.  Ecology Laboratory (1).  
Laboratory and field exercises designed to illustrate 
principles discussed in BIOL 217. The lab is required for 
students pursing a Bachelor of Science or is an 
Environmental Science major. 
(Co-requisite: BIOL 217). Fall. 
 
BIOL221.  Principles  of  Genetics  (3).   
Mechanisms  and  laws of inheritance, the nature of the 
genetic material, and the structure and function of genes and 
the regulation of their activity. Three hours of lecture. See 
BIOL 
223 
for 
a 
related 
laboratory 
experience. 
(Prerequisites: BIOL104, CHEM101 and MATH101). Fall. 
 
BIOL223.  Genetics Laboratory (1).  
Laboratory exercises and experiments designed to illustrate 
principles discussed in BIOL221. The lab is required for 
students pursuing a Bachelor of Science, and is not required 
for Environmental Science majors.  
(Co-requisite: BIOL221). Fall. 
 
 BIOL262.  Invertebrate Zoology (4).  
The biology of invertebrates (excluding insects but 
including parasitic invertebrates) with reference to anatomy, 
ecology, taxonomy and physiology. Three hours of lecture, 
three hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL101 
or BIOL104). Fall. 
 
BIOL285.  Biostatistics (3) 
An introduction to probability and statistics, with an 
emphasis on application to hypothesis testing in biological 
sciences. Students will implement and interpret basic 
statistical tests, including t-tests, correlation, linear 
modeling, ANOVA. 2 hours lecture, 2 hours of lab/week. 
(Prerequisites: BIOL103 and MATH115) 
 
BIOL299.  Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
BIOL301.  Junior Seminar (1).  
Required for all junior Biology majors. A course exploring 
critical issues in biology through selected readings, 
discussion 
and 
presentations 
(oral 
and 
written). 
(Prerequisites: Junior standing, BIOL103 or BIOL104, 
BIOL221 or BIOL326, and four additional hours of BIOL 
credits). Fall,  
 
BIOL309.  Topics in Biology (1-4).  
Investigations of advanced or specialized topics of current 
interest. Topics and coverage varies with semester and 
instructor. May be repeated. (Prerequisite vary with 
coverage). Offered as needed. 
 
BIOL310.  Neurobiology (4). 
An overview of neuroscience.  Lectures and labs cover the 
key principles, methods, and concepts of the nervous 
system.  Topics include: structural organization and 
functioning of the nervous system; disorders of the brain; 
and neural development. (Prerequisites:  BIOL103, 
BIOL104 and CHEM 224).  
 
BIOL312.  Principles of Neuropharmacology (3). 
A combination of the principles of neuroscience and 
pharmacology will be applied. Topics include the biological 
actions and mechanisms of drugs with the nervous system; 
the behavioral effects of psychoactive drugs; and treatments 
of certain nervous system disorders. Three hours lecture. 
(Prerequisite: Junior standing and at least one 300-400 level 
BIOL course) 
 
BIOL315.  Pathophysiology (3). 
The development of disease states and/or conditions due to 
biological or aberrant physiological processes is compared 
to normal physiological function.  Focus is primarily on 
vertebrates, especially humans.  (Prerequisite: BIOL326 or 
BIOL365).   
 
BIOL324.  Conservation Biology (3).  
Course Descriptions 
 
200 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
An examination of the genetic and ecological concepts 
important in developing plans for preserving species and 
habitats. Techniques designed to gather the required 
information will be examined. Case studies of work on 
selected species will be discussed. Three hours of lecture per 
week. (Prerequisite: BIOL217 or 221; CCC101 when 
offered as a writing intensive course). Fall. 
 
BIOL326.  Microbiology (4).  
An introduction to microorganisms including bacteria, fungi 
and viruses. Cell structure, metabolism and genetics will be 
covered with an emphasis on current techniques used in 
medical and environmental studies. Laboratory work 
emphasizes microscopical, biochemical and molecular 
genetic identification of bacteria. Three hours of lecture, 
three hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisites: BIOL103 
and BIOL104).  
 
 
BIOL327.  Advanced Microbiology (3) 
Exploration of current topics involving disease-causing 
microbes 
of 
both 
animals 
and 
plants 
including 
epidemiology, pathogenesis, and treatment of animal and 
plant disease due to bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Emphasis 
on viral diseases of animals and fungal diseases of plants. 
Three hours of lecture per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL326) 
 
BIOL333.  Biochemistry (3).  
The chemistry and biological significance of proteins, 
enzymes, lipids, nucleic acids, and porphyrins, including the 
generation of phosphate bond energy via metabolism and its 
use in biosynthesis. (Prerequisites: CHEM224 and 
permission of instructor or CHEM225). Offered as needed. 
 
BIOL334.  Biochemistry Laboratory (1).   
Lab techniques for the study macromolecules  
(Co-requisite: BIOL333) Offered as needed.  
 
BIOL343.  Molecular Cell Biology (3).  
The structure and functioning of eukaryotic cells, with 
emphasis on the control of gene expression Molecular 
aspects of the control of development are also discussed. 
(Prerequisites: BIOL221 and CHEM224) Fall. 
 
BIOL345.  Methods in Molecular Biology (3).  
The basic techniques utilized in molecular biology are 
discussed. Students learn the techniques through a series of 
laboratory exercises with progressively more demanding 
protocols One hour lecture and five hours of laboratory per 
week. (Prerequisites: BIOL221 or BIOL343 and permission 
of instructor).  
 
BIOL351.  Plant Physiology (3). 
Advanced discussion of cellular and tissue function and 
whole organism biochemical processes in living plants. 
Topics will include water and mineral movement, 
photosynthesis, primary metabolism, phloem translocation, 
secondary metabolites, growth and development, and 
control of flowering. Three hours of lecture per week. 
(Prerequisites: BIOL103, CHEM105, and CHEM117) 
 
BIOL352.  Plant Ecology (4).  
The interaction of plants and their biotic and abiotic 
environment. Study of multiple levels of organization from 
individual-level traits to population dynamics, from 
communities of coexisting species to ecosystem function. A 
combination of 3 hours lecture, 3 combines hours of field 
and laboratory experience each week. (Prerequisites: 
BIOL103 and BIOL217). Spring of even years. 
 
BIOL355.  Evolutionary Biology (3).  
The study of evolutionary processes and mechanisms, with 
consideration of deep evolutionary time, the fossil record, 
micro-evolutionary forces, including genetic drift, gene 
flow, mutation, and selection, as well as mechanisms of 
speciation and species concepts. (Prerequisites: BIOL103 or 
BIOL104, CCC101 and sophomore standing). 
 
 
 
BIOL364.  Entomology (4).  
The biology of insects with reference to anatomy, ecology, 
taxonomy and physiology, focusing on local species and 
medically important ones. Three hours of lecture, three 
hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL101 or 
BIOL104). Offered as needed. 
 
BIOL365.  General Physiology (4).  
The structural and functional correlates of organismal 
biology, including membrane specializations, intermediary 
metabolism 
and 
homeostatic 
control 
mechanisms.  
Emphasis is on mammals, primarily humans.  The lab 
includes non-invasive experiments that are performed on 
students enrolled in the class, using basic research and 
standard medical equipment.  (Prerequisites: BIOL104, 
MATH115 and CHEM224). Fall. 
 
BIOL366.  Biology of Parasites (4).  
The biology of common parasites of humans and animals. 
Emphasis is on the study of evolutionary strategies of 
parasites and their vectors, the identification and life 
histories of common parasites and the methods used to 
analyze outbreaks and patterns of disease incidence. Three 
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite: BIOL101 or BIOL104).  
 
Course Descriptions 
 
201 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
BIOL369.  Developmental Biology (4).    
Modern principles of gene regulation and biochemical 
control of plant and animal developmental processes, from 
embryo through senescence. Includes environmental 
signals, teratogens and cancer. Three hours of lecture, three 
hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisites: BIOL221 and 
CHEM224). Offered as needed. 
 
BIOL370.  Immunology (3).  
Principles of immunology, including the structure of 
antigens and the regulation of cell-mediated and humeral 
immunity. Non-specific immunity and body defenses are 
also discussed. Recent papers on related topics are 
discussed. (Prerequisite: BIOL221 or BIOL326; Co-
requisite: BIOL333 or BIOL341, CHEM224 or CHEM341). 
 
 
BIOL375.  Animal Behavior & Communication (4).  
The behavior and communication of a variety of animals, 
particularly vertebrates, examined at the physiological, 
ecological and evolutionary levels. Both indoor and field 
laboratory 
experiences 
incorporate 
behavioral 
and 
communication 
instrumentation 
and 
computer-aided 
statistical analysis of results. (Prerequisite: one course of 
200 or higher level in PSYC or BIOL).  
 
 
 
BIOL378.  Ichthyology (4).  
The principles of classification, distribution, behavior and 
adaptation of fishes, within an ecological and evolutionary 
context. Includes laboratory and field identification, with 
emphasis on Michigan fauna. Three hours of lecture, three 
hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL212). 
May, Spring, or Summer. 
 
BIOL379.  Herpetology (4).  
The principles of classification, distribution, behavior and 
adaptation of amphibians and reptiles, within an ecological 
and evolutionary context. Includes laboratory and field 
identification, with emphasis on Michigan fauna. Three 
hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite: BIOL212). May or Summer. 
  
BIOL380.  Ornithology (4).  
The principles of classification, distribution, behavior and 
adaptation of birds, within an ecological and evolutionary 
context. Includes laboratory and field identification, with 
emphasis on Michigan fauna. Three hours of lecture, three 
hours of laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: BIOL212). 
Spring, May or Summer. 
 
BIOL381.  Mammalogy (4).  
The principles of classification, distribution, behavior and 
adaptation of mammals, within an ecological and 
evolutionary context.   Includes laboratory and field 
identification, with emphasis on Michigan fauna. Three 
hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite: BIOL212). Spring, May or Summer. 
 
BIOL399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
Previously 
approved 
internships 
include 
hospital 
observational experience and work at Kalamazoo Nature 
Center and Hidden Lake Gardens. 
 
BIOL401.  Capstone: Senior Seminar (2).   
Student-led discussions of recent advances in biological 
research. One or two hours per week. (Prerequisites: 
BIOL103, BIOL104, and two of BIOL 217, BIOL221, or 
BIOL326; and permission of department). Fall,  
 
BIOL450.  Biological Research (1-2).  
Original research in biology requiring acceptance of a thesis 
proposal by the biology faculty prior to registration. 
Proposal must include literature survey, budget and time 
scale for completion of each segment. May be repeated. 
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor). Fall,  
 
 
BIOL455.  Human Anatomy (3).  
Dissection and the anatomical exploration of the human 
body using cadavers. Two hours of lecture and two hours of 
laboratory per week. (Prerequisites: BIOL104, Junior or 
Senior standing in Biology and/or permission of instructor). 
 
 
 
 
BIOL451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Independent study in biology that is supervised by a biology 
faculty member. May be repeated. (Prerequisite: permission 
of instructor). 
 
BIOL499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
 
Courses in Business  
Administration (BUS) 
 
BUS101.  Introduction to Business (3). 
Course exposes students to the business environment and 
current issues in business.  Students will actively read and 
discuss business publications and work in teams to complete 
a business simulation, develop critical thinking skills, and 
evaluate decisions.   
Course Descriptions 
 
202 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
BUS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
BUS242.  Business & Professional Communication (3).  
Focus upon the analysis and application of communication 
principles and practices applicable to interpersonal, team, 
public, and technological communications for successful 
participation in organizational and professional activities.  
Open to second semester freshmen. (Prerequisites: CCC101 
and BUS101).  Fall,    
 
BUS255.  Field/Travel Experience (3).  
Includes a four- to five- day stay in a major metropolitan city 
in the U.S. or Canada. Students visit a variety of institutions 
such as security/commodity markets, international financial 
centers, advertising agencies, government centers and 
cultural exhibits, with free time also in which to experience 
the diverse flavors of a major city. Individual academic 
assignments relate the field/ travel experience to the 
student’s specific major. (Prerequisite: junior standing). 
Occasional May or Summer terms.   
 
BUS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
BUS305.  Business Law I (3).  
Review of legal procedure, the judicial system; cries and 
torts; intellectual property; internet law; contracts; forms of 
agreement 
and 
performance; 
the 
discharge 
and 
enforceability of contractual arrangements; analysis of sales 
of goods under the UCC; employment law and 
discrimination. (Prerequisite: BUS242 or permission of 
instructor). Fall.   
 
BUS346.  Social, Political & Ethical Issues in  
Business (3).  
Topics include the social, legal, moral and ethical pressures 
exerted on business enterprises by the external environment; 
the rules and ethical responsibilities of business persons; 
corporate governance; and the assessment of social and 
ethical performance. (Prerequisite: MGMT243).
 
BUS350.  Topics in Business Administration (3).  
In-depth theoretical and practical coverage of concepts in a 
specialized area of business administration, using the 
conceptual knowledge for planning and problem solving. 
Topics may include but are not limited to new product 
development, managing information, ethical considerations 
in decision making and cross-cultural business negotiations. 
May be repeated with a different topic. (Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor). Offered as needed.   
 
BUS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
BUS406.  Advanced Business Law (3). 
Legal problems of business enterprises, including principals 
and agents, partnerships and corporations, and government 
regulation of business such as securities and antitrust; 
creditors’ and debtors’ rights including bankruptcy; 
Uniform Commercial Code. Other topics potentially include 
real and personal property laws, environmental law, 
consumer law, and trusts and estates. (Prerequisite: 
BUS305) Offered once per academic year.   
 
BUS449.  Capstone: Strategic Management (3).  
This course introduces key concepts, tools, and principles of 
strategy formulation and competitive analysis.  It is 
concerned with managerial decisions and actions that affect 
the performance and survival of business enterprises. 
(Prerequisites: FIN310 and BUS346).  Fall,    
 
BUS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business department). 
 
BUS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Financial Planning (CFP) 
 
CFP101.  Introduction to the CFP Credential (1). 
This course serves as the orientation to the CFP program.  
Students will research the CFP profession, the requirements 
for the exam, the requirements for certification, and draft a 
goal statement.  (Prerequisite:  
FIN110 or ACCT204; FIN110 or ACCT204 may also be 
taken as a co-requisite).   
 
CFP301.  General Principles of Financial Planning (3). 
This course provides a comprehensive examination of the 
general principles of financial planning, professional 
conduct and regulation, and education planning.  The course 
also covers the regulatory environment, time value of 
money, and economic concepts.  (Prerequisite: CFP101; 
CFP101 can also be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP302.  Risk Management & Insurance Planning (3). 
This course provides a comprehensive examination of the 
general principles of risk management and insurance 
planning for individual and family clients.  (Prerequisite: 
CFP101; CFP101 can also be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP303.  Investment Planning (3). 
This course explores the securities market, sources of 
information, risk/return, stocks, bonds, options, futures, and 
security analysis, and culminates in portfolio construction 
Course Descriptions 
 
203 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
and analysis.  (Prerequisite: CFP101; CFP101 can also be 
taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP304.  Tax Planning (3). 
This course covers taxation for individuals, sole 
proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations, as well as 
the tax aspects of investments, insurance, annuities, and 
retirement planning.  (Prerequisite: CFP101; CFP101 can 
also be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP305.  Retirement Savings & Income Planning (3). 
This course provides the foundation to conduct a retirement 
needs analysis and understand the different types of 
retirement plans available to individuals, and to recognize 
the key factors that affect retirement plan selection for 
business owners.  (Prerequisite: CFP101; CFP101 can also 
be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP306.  Estate Planning (3). 
This course introduces federal gift, estate, and transfer taxes 
and planning techniques used to minimize the impact of 
these taxes on transfers of wealth.  This course stresses the 
need for balancing tax and non-tax considerations in 
creating estate plans.  (Prerequisite: CFP101; CFP101 can 
also be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
CFP307.  Financial Plan Development (3). 
Students will develop a complete financial plan, through the 
use of case studies and interviewing mock clients.  
Presentations of a formal financial plan, demonstrating the 
ability to set client expectations and communicate with 
clients, are also required.  (Prerequisites: CFP301, CFP302, 
CFP303, CFP304, CFP305 and CFP306). 
 
CFP309.  CFP Examination Preparation (1). 
This course serves as the conclusion to the CFP program.  
Students will prepare a study plan, register to sit for the CFP 
exam, and explore career prospects.  (Prerequisite: CFP307; 
CFP307 can also be taken as a co-requisite). 
 
 
Courses in Chemistry (CHEM) 
 
CHEM101.  The World of Chemistry (4) (NATURAL  
SCIENCE). 
Intended for the non-science major, this course will intro- 
duce concepts of chemistry by relating them to their daily 
uses. Hands-on learning is emphasized through classroom 
and laboratory activities, showing the interplay of theory 
and experiment, and how they relate to the scientific method. 
(Does not count toward Chemistry major or minor). Three 
hours of lecture, one 3-hour laboratory per week. Fall and 
 
 
CHEM101.  The World of Chemistry Lab 
Laboratory exercises and experiments designed to illustrate 
principles discussed in CHEM101. (Co-requisite: 
CHEM101) Fall   
 
CHEM102.  Kitchen Chemistry (4) (NATURAL  
SCIENCE). 
Introduction of chemistry and biochemistry concepts based 
on food and beverages, including topics associated with 
chemical changes that occur during cooking and baking.  
Specific topics will vary by semester.  (Does not count 
towards Chemistry major or minor).  Three hours of lecture, 
one 3-hour laboratory per week.. Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM105.  General Chemistry I (3) (NATURAL  
SCIENCE).  
The first course in an introductory sequence in chemistry, 
with topics including units of measurement, physical 
properties of matter, atomic structure, chemical reactions an 
stoichiometry, aqueous solutions, acids and bases, chemical 
bonding, and Lewis structures. (Prerequisite: MATH101; 
Co-requisite: CHEM117). Fall. 
 
CHEM106.  General Chemistry II (3) (NATURAL  
SCIENCE).  
The second course in an introductory sequence in chemistry.  
Topics include physical equilibria, chemical equilibria, 
acids and bases, chemical kinetics, entropy and free energy 
and electrochemistry. (Prerequisite: CHEM105; Co-
requisite: CHEM118).  
 
CHEM117.  Introductory Chemistry Laboratory I (1) 
 (NATURAL SCIENCE). 
An introductory laboratory sequence for the chemistry 
program.  Introduction to laboratory apparatus, lab skills, 
techniques, data collection, and note taking.  One three hour 
laboratory per week.  (Co-requisite: CHEM105).  The 
Natural Science distribution credit will only be given for 
students receiving a passing grade in BOTH CHEM105 and 
CHEM117. Fall. 
 
CHEM118.  Introductory Chemistry Laboratory II (1)  
(NATURAL SCIENCE). 
An introductory laboratory sequence for the chemistry 
program.  Continuation of laboratory techniques and skills 
including writing laboratory reports.  Topics will relate to 
material covered in CHEM106 lectures.  One three- hour 
laboratory per week. (Co-requisite: CHEM106).   
 
CHEM199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
 
 
 
CHEM205.  Environmental Chemistry (3).  
Course Descriptions 
 
204 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Application of basic concepts of chemistry to issues of air, 
water, and soil pollution. The chemistry of energy 
generation and its environmental implications are also 
discussed.  Three lectures per week. (Prerequisite: 
CHEM224). Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM206.  Environmental Chemistry Laboratory (1).  
Laboratory to correspond to CHEM205. Application of 
basic concepts of chemistry to issues of air, water, and soil 
pollution. The chemistry of energy generation and its 
environmental implications are also studied.  One 3-hour 
laboratory per week. (Co-requisite: CHEM205). Offered as 
needed. 
 
CHEM214.  Chemical Demonstrations (1).  
The theory and practice of performing classroom 
demonstrations exhibiting chemical principles. Students are 
required to participate in a community outreach program as 
part of their final evaluation. (Prerequisite: one previous 
CHEM class). May be repeated. Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM222.  Scientific Writing (3).  
Focuses on skills necessary for writing in the social and 
physical sciences. Students will read and create a variety of 
documents, including lab notes, reports, summaries, and 
abstracts. Significant library and internet research, which 
students will use to write technical descriptions, literature 
reviews, instructions, and essays. (Prerequisite: CCC102). 
Offered as needed. 
 
 
 
 
CHEM224.  Organic Chemistry I (3).  
The first course of two-semester sequence focuses on the 
study of common organic functional groups including their 
structures, nomenclature, isomerism and  stereochemistry. 
Bonding, acid-base theories and organic reactions are also 
included. (Prerequisites: CHEM106  and CHEM118; Co-
requisite: CHEM226). Fall. 
 
CHEM225.  Organic Chemistry II (3). 
This course is a continuation of CHEM224 and includes 
additional classes of organic compounds and their reactions. 
The principles of elucidation of organic compounds 
structures by IR, NMR, UV, and MS are also included. 
(Prerequisites: CHEM224 and CHEM226;  
Co-requisite: CHEM227).  
 
CHEM226.  Organic Chemistry Laboratory I (1). 
The course introduces students to basic laboratory 
techniques of preparation, purification, and identification of 
organic compounds.  Introductions to the use of 
instrumentation in organic laboratories (IR & GC) is also 
included.  Four hours per week. (Prerequisite: CHEM118; 
Co-requisite: CHEM224). Fall. 
 
CHEM227.  Organic Chemistry Laboratory II (1).  
The course focuses on qualitative organic analysis in which 
both classical and instrumental techniques are utilized to 
elucidate organic structures. Preparation, separation, and 
identification of compounds are also included. Four hours 
per 
week. 
(Prerequisite: 
CHEM226; 
Co-requisite: 
CHEM225).  
 
CHEM273.  Nuclear Weapons and Power (2). 
The science and politics of nuclear weapons and nuclear 
power, including the discovery of the atom, the Manhattan 
Project, the Cold War arms race, the prospects for nuclear 
terrorism, and the controversies over nuclear power and 
nuclear waste disposal. Students who have taken PSCI273  
may not take this course for credit. (Prerequisite: CCC101). 
Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
CHEM303.  Analytical Chemistry (3).  
The study of chemical stoichiometry and equilibria, 
including elementary principles of volumetric, gravimetric, 
spectrophotometric and potentiometric analysis as applied to 
chemical analysis. Three lectures per week. (Prerequisites: 
MATH115, CHEM106 and CHEM118;  Co-requisite: 
CHEM305). Fall. 
 
CHEM305.  Analytical Chemistry Laboratory (1).  
Experiments to learn analytical chemistry laboratory 
techniques and data analysis with emphasis on volumetric 
and 
gravimetric 
analysis, 
molecular 
and 
atomic 
spectrophotometry, and modern separation techniques. (Co-
requisite: CHEM303). Fall. 
 
CHEM321.  Thermodynamics (3). 
 
Equilibrium properties of chemical systems related to 
reactions in gas and solution phases, and heat and energy 
transfer.  Studies will move from ideal conditions to non-
ideal states to model the behavior of chemical systems. 
(Prerequisites: CHEM303 and CHEM305, MATH135 and 
PHYS101 or PHYS205). Fall. 
 
CHEM322.  Quantum Mechanics (3). 
 
Starting with a historical foundation into the deviations from 
Newtonian Physics, this course explores the quantum world 
and its relation to chemical systems.  The behavior of 
systems with both wave and particle behavior and their 
importance in the development of modern spectroscopy and 
Course Descriptions 
 
205 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
technology will be covered. (Prerequisites: CHEM303, 
MATH135 and PHYS101 or PHYS205). Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM325.  Physical Chemistry Laboratory (1).  
Experiments to demonstrate concepts learned in the realm of 
physical chemistry. Students will utilize instruments, 
analyze data, and write consistent with standards set by the 
chemistry community. Three hours of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisites: CHEM303, CHEM305 and CHEM321).  
 
 
CHEM341.  Biochemistry I (3). 
Coverage of the chemistry and biological significance of 
biological 
macromolecules 
including 
nucleic 
acids, 
proteins, lipids and carbohydrates.  Special emphasis on 
macromolecular 
structure, 
function, 
and 
enzyme 
mechanisms and kinetics. (Prerequisites: CHEM224 and 
CHEM226). Fall. 
 
CHEM342.  Biochemistry II (3). 
Coverage of the biosynthesis and metabolism of nucleic 
acids, proteins, cofactors, amino acids, lipids and 
carbohydrates.  Special emphasis on cellular utilization of 
energy and the control of metabolism at the genetic and 
enzymatic level. (Prerequisite: CHEM341).  
 
  
CHEM344.  Biochemistry Laboratory (1).  
The study of biochemical lab techniques with emphasis on 
isolation, purification, and characterization of biological 
macromolecules, electrophoresis, and enzyme kinetics using 
purified proteins. (Co-requisite: CHEM341).  Fall. 
 
CHEM399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
CHEM401.  Chemistry Seminar (1).   
Students will continue research in a narrow focus and 
present the material in an oral presentation like one that 
would be found in a professional conference setting. 
(Prerequisites: CHEM303 and CHEM305).   
 
CHEM404.  Advanced Inorganic Chemistry (3).  
Chemical theories and laws and their applications to 
inorganic systems, including quantum theory, wave 
mechanics, the periodic table, chemical bonding, inorganic 
stereochemistry, coordination compounds, acids and bases, 
non-aqueous solvents and the chemistry of selected 
elements. Three lectures per week. 
(Co-requisite: CHEM321). Spring of even years. 
 
CHEM405.  Advanced Physical Chemistry (3).  
Quantum mechanics and statistical thermodynamics with 
applications to chemical systems. Three lectures per week. 
(Prerequisites: CHEM322, MATH215 and MATH303). 
Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM406.  Advanced Organic Chemistry (3).  
Advanced theories of molecular structure and reactivity of 
organic compounds with attention to reaction mechanisms 
and the methods by which information is obtained about 
molecules and reactions. Three lectures per week. 
(Prerequisite: CHEM225). Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM407.  Instrumental Analysis (3).  
The theory of modern instrumental analysis techniques, 
including ultraviolet and visible spectrophotometry, 
emission, atomic absorption, infrared and nuclear magnetic 
resonance 
spectroscopy, 
gas 
chromatography 
and 
electrochemical methods.  Three lectures per week.  
(Prerequisites: CHEM303 and CHEM305; Co-requisite: 
CHEM408). Spring of odd years. 
 
CHEM408.  Instrumental Analysis Laboratory (1).  
The application of modern instrumental analysis techniques, 
including UV/Vis, emission, atomic absorption and mass 
spectrometry, infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy, gas and liquid chromatography, and 
electrochemical methods.  
(Co-requisite: CHEM407). Spring of odd years. 
 
CHEM411.  Recent Advances in Biochemistry (3).  
This course will focus on recent advances in biochemistry 
through detailed analysis of the current literature.  Special 
emphasis will be placed on how biochemical discoveries 
improve our quality of life and how the study of 
biochemistry is used in the diagnosis and treatment of 
disease. (Prerequisite: CHEM342).  Offered as needed. 
 
CHEM415.  Advanced Topics in Chemistry (3).  
In-depth study of chemistry topics, which vary by semester 
and based on instructor. Topics include, but not limited to 
Forensics, Polymers, Medicinal, and Industrial chemistry. 
May be repeated for credit with a different topic. 
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor). 
 
CHEM450.  Research in Chemistry (1-3).  
Laboratory research on a topic agreed upon by the student 
and the faculty research director. A formal report of results 
is required. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 hours. 
(Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
CHEM451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
A program of independent research. May be repeated for a 
maximum of 6 hours. (Prerequisite: permission of 
department). 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
206 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
CHEM470.  Capstone: Interdisciplinary Chemistry (2).  
The students will work on an individual research project 
relating to a current topic in chemistry. Topics may change 
based upon student and faculty interest. Students will 
prepare for an oral exam by the faculty.  (Prerequisite: 
CHEM401).  Fall. 
 
CHEM499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Computer Information  
Systems (CIS) 
 
CIS101.  Fundamentals of Python Programming (3). 
In this Google-developed course, students learn how to 
program with Python, and collaboratively solve problems 
using real-world examples such as graphics, image 
processing, cryptography, data analysis, astronomy, games, 
and environmental simulations.   
(Co-requisite: CIS101L). 
 
CIS101L.  Fundamentals of Python Programming  
Lab (1). 
In-class projects to accompany CIS101.  (Co-requisite: 
CIS101). 
 
CIS140.  Computer Applications for Business (3).  
A practical course in business problem solving, decision 
making 
and 
presentation 
of 
information 
utilizing 
microcomputer technology. Through business problem 
simulations the student will actively solve problems while 
learning about microcomputer hardware configuration, 
operating systems, and common business microcomputer 
software including spreadsheets, data base management 
systems, and business graphics.  (Prerequisite: MATH101). 
 
CIS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
CIS201.  Introduction to Data Science (3). 
In this course, students learn how to gather, clean, 
normalize, visualize and analyze data to drive informed 
decision-making, using spreadsheets, SQL, Python, and 
other tools to work collaboratively on real-world datasets.  
(Prerequisite: CS103; Co-requisite: CIS201L). 
 
CIS201L.  Introduction to Data Science Lab (1). 
In-class projects to accompany CIS201.  (Co-requisite: 
CIS201).   
 
CIS250.   Advanced Web-Based Programming (3).  
The use of advanced programming techniques, using server-
side soft- ware to develop dynamic web pages. Discussion 
of relevant human interface issues.  (Prerequisite: CS110).  
 
CIS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
CIS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
CIS451.  Independent Study (1-3). 
 
CIS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Communication Art  
& Sciences (COMM) 
 
 COMM109.  Beginning Media Performance (3).  
(HUMANITIES) 
The goal of this course is to introduce students to techniques 
used by media talent.  Performances in studio and on-air 
work include green screen, interview, news desk, music, and 
talk show formats.  Expected outcomes include performance 
readiness in current media.  Fall,  
 
COMM110.  Survey of Mass Communication (3)  
(HUMANITIES).  
Survey course with emphasis on the history of the mass 
media and its social, cultural, economic, ethical and political 
impact. Fall,  
 
COMM199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
Fall, Spring, May and Summer. 
 
COMM205.  Public Relations I: Introduction to Public  
Relations (3).  
An overview of public relations, with an emphasis in 
understanding that various career opportunities in the field, 
along with learning the job skills of the entry-level public 
relations position. (Prerequisite: CCC101).  Open to 
freshmen.  Fall,. 
 
 
COMM209.  Interpersonal Communication (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Theoretical overview of dyadic relationships and an 
exploration of how meaning develops in personal, social and 
organizational relationships Open to freshmen Fall. 
 
 
COMM210.  Digital Media Production I (3).  
This course introduces students to production techniques 
used in digital multimedia laboratories and studios.  
Expected outcomes include beginning proficiency in 
production software. (Prerequisite: COMM109). Fall, 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
207 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
COMM218.  Introduction to Communication 
Theory (3).   
The goal of this course is to introduce students to theories 
and methods used in communication studies.  Students will 
learn to observe and write about communication artifacts in 
the media and interpersonal experiences. (Prerequisite:  
CCC101). Fall. 
 
COMM245. 
 
Strategic 
Public 
Relations 
(3). 
(HUMANITIES) 
This course introduces students to public relations theory, 
the PESO model of communication strategies and the 
relationship 
between 
business 
and 
communication 
strategies. (Prerequisite: COMM205 and COMM218) Fall, 
 
                                                                       
COMM280.  Communication Ethics (3)  
(HUMANITIES).  
Methods of understanding ethics as a process of critical 
reflection in human communication. Application to both 
contemporary and classical subject matter. Emphasis on 
both interpersonal and media influences. (Prerequisite: 
CCC102). Fall,  
 
COMM285.  Podcasting, Audio and Radio 
 Production (3).  
Overview of the principles of radio production and 
operations, with an emphasis on producing programming for 
terrestrial, 
satellite, 
podcast 
and 
streaming 
radio.  
(Prerequisites: CCC102 and COMM109).  Fall even years. 
 
COMM290.  Live Stream Video & TV Production (3).  
This course provides students with basic training in Video 
Streaming and the Live-In-Tape studio production process 
via crew management, project development, production 
technique, and combining these with Field Productions. 
(Prerequisites: COMM109 and COMM210).  Spring even 
years. 
 
COMM299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
COMM302.  Persuasion (3) (HUMANITIES).  
Overview of contemporary theories of 
persuasion, research methods and practical application with 
an emphasis on how persuasion is used in advertising, 
public relations and marketing to influence consumer 
behavior. (Prerequisite: CCC102) Spring even years. 
 
COMM303.  Public Relations Tactics (3). 
This course provides students with a range of Strategic 
Communications and Public Relations tactics that they can 
deploy to create effective, targeting messaging.  The primary 
focus will be on translating principles and theory to 
applicable actions.  (Prerequisite: COMM245 & 205). 
 
COMM308.  Mass Media Criticism (3).  
An overview of critical media studies theories and methods.  
The course focuses on teaching students how to critically 
analyze media texts that discuss gender, race and class. 
(Prerequisite: CCC101). As needed. 
 
COMM311.  Media Activities: ACTV (1).  
This class prepared students for the rapidly change world of 
professional video broadcasting by working for ACTV.  
From traditional television broadcasting to the power of 
podcasting, students will gain hands-on experience.  Does 
not count for elective credit in Communication Arts and 
Science major.  (Prerequisite: COMM109).  As needed. 
 
COMM312.  Media Activities: WVAC (1).  
Students taking this course will gain experience producing 
live radio programming for WVAC.  The programming will 
begin by producing a predesigned format and evolve as the 
skills of performers and production personnel improve.  
Does not count for elective credit in Communication Arts 
and Science major.  (Prerequisite: COMM109).   Fall. 
 
COMM313.  PRush Creative (1-3). 
Credit is earned for participation in a public relations 
project in the Adrian community.  Students learn about 
public relations writing and production and experience 
working with a real client.  Does not count for elective 
credit in Communication Arts and Science major.  
(Prerequisite: COMM205).   
 
COMM314.  Public Relations II: Campaign Writing 
and Management (3) (Writing Intensive).  
Principles of using social media for public relations and 
advanced case studies in public relations combines with 
hands-on experience in developing a public relations 
campaign.  (Prerequisite:  COMM205).  
 
COMM317.  PR Performance and Production (3).    
This course will introduce students to the role of the public 
relations media technician.  It focuses on using the media to 
represent, create productions, and plan PR strategy.  The 
course emphasizes learning how to conduct yourself in 
media situations. (Prerequisites: COMM205). Fall,  
 
COMM319.  Film History (3) (HUMANITIES).  
This course focuses on major film genres exploring their 
development, impact, and characteristics. (Prerequisite: 
CCC101).  Fall. 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
208 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
COMM330.  Intercultural Communication (3) 
(HUMANITIES).  
Examines the communication behaviors and patterns unique 
to a variety of cultures as well as those of gender, racial and 
ethnic-based subcultures, using a balance of theory and 
practical application. (Prerequisites: CCC101 and CCC102). 
Fall odd years. 
 
COMM338.  Crisis Communication (3). 
Students will learn how to develop and execute effective 
crisis communication strategies in both the private and 
public sector using a variety of principles and techniques.  
(Prerequisite: COMM314 and COMM205). Fall and Spring 
 
COMM339.  Advanced Digital Media Production (3). 
The goal of this course is to offer students advanced training 
production 
techniques 
used 
in 
digital, 
multimedia 
laboratories and studios.  Expected outcomes include 
continued expansion of proficiency in production software 
usage.  (Prerequisite: COMM210). 
 
COMM342.  Public Relations and Organizational 
Theory (3) (HUMANITIES).  
Overview of current theories and organizational 
communication and public relations, with a focus on 
practical application, case studies, 
and organizational ethics and leadership.(Prerequisites: 
CCC101 and CCC102). Offered as needed. 
 
COMM345.  Sports Broadcasting (3).  
The course will cover a look at the early history of radio and 
TV and how the industry morphed into sports broadcasting. 
Topics also covered include how to put together run downs, 
on-camera reporting, script writing and the art of 
interviewing as well as the ethical considerations. 
(Prerequisites: COMM109 and CCC102) 
 
 
 
COMM385.  Advanced Audio Production (3). 
This course presents students with the opportunity to create 
audio productions which require advanced planning and 
production skills, and access to more advanced production 
equipment. The type of productions can include music 
production in the form of popular music genres and sound 
tracks, ADR for video and film, serial audio for radio and 
podcast, and other specialized advance audio work. 
(Prerequisite: COMM285) Spring odd years. 
 
COMM387.  Documentary Filmmaking (3). 
This course provides a survey of the history, theory and 
operation of the documentary film genre.  Through film 
screenings and discussions, explorations of technique and 
technology students will gain a greater appreciation for the 
wide-reaching film genre.  (Prerequisites: COMM110 and 
COMM210).  Spring even years, rotating with COMM388- 
Fiction Filmmaking. 
 
COMM388.  Fiction Filmmaking (3). 
This course aims to expose students to a variety of fiction 
filmmaking styles and theoretical application.  Students will 
put study fiction method into practice by interacting with 
equipment and software to create unique short films.  
(Prerequisites: COMM210 and COMM319).  Spring even 
years, rotating with COMM387 Documentary Filmmaking.  
 
COMM390.  BFA Career Workshop (3). 
This course gives students an opportunity to develop their 
career goals and building necessary portfolio material 
required for professional work in filmmaking.  Students will 
complete a film reel, project press kit and online digital 
media 
portfolio. 
 
(Prerequisites: 
COMM387 
and 
COMM388).  Fall. 
 
COMM399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
Fall, Spring, May and Summer (May Term offering limited 
to 4 credit hours; Summer Term offering limited to 6 credit 
hours). 
 
 
COMM416.  Topics in Communication Arts (3).  
Examination of a particular topic of interest to faculty and 
students in COMM Arts. (Prerequisites: CCC102). Offered 
as needed. 
 
COMM422.  Capstone: Experience in COMM Arts (3).  
The goal of this course is to provide students with an 
opportunity to do an independent professional project or 
research 
project 
in 
media 
studies 
or 
public 
relations. Students will learn to choose and guide their own 
individual 
projects 
with 
minimal 
supervision..  
(Prerequisites: COMM308).  Spring, different sections for 
each major. 
 
COMM451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Supervised reading and research in a special interest area of 
argumentation 
and 
advocacy 
or 
mass 
mediated 
communication. (Prerequisite: permission of department 
and instructor’s approval of a written proposal that is 
submitted to the department prior to registration for the 
course). Fall, Spring, May and Summer. 
 
COMM499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Computer Science (CS) 
Course Descriptions 
 
209 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
CS100.  Internet History, Technology, and Security (3). 
This course will explain the Internet and how it works.  It 
introduces students to the important technological issues 
currently facing society.  Topics include history of Internet 
including commercialization and growth, computer 
generations, Internet and packets, transport control 
protocol, application protocols, security, and Web security.  
This course is great lead into Web design, Web 
development, programming, or even network 
administration.  (Students cannot take CS100 and CS101 
for credits towards a Computer Science minor or major.  
CS100 does not substitute for CS101). 
 
CS101.  Introduction to Computer Science (3). 
This course gives students a broad look at Computer 
Science from both software and hardware perspectives.  It 
introduces topics on the Internet as a global information 
infrastructure, computer networks, Internet browsing tools, 
HTML, data structures, algorithm problem solving, 
overview of computer organization, number systems, 
switching algebra, logic gates, security, and computing 
ethics and society.  The course will cover theoretical and 
practical concepts.  Students will develop basic projects.  
(Students cannot take CS100 and CS101 for credits 
towards a Computer Science minor or major). 
 
CS103.  Programming for Everyone I (3). 
This course aims to teach students the basics of 
programming using Python  It covers the basics of how 
one constructs a program from a series of simple 
instructions in Python  This course will introduce the core 
syntax, commands, and data structures of the Python 
programming language  Topics include built-in data 
structures such as lists, dictionaries, and tuples to perform 
data analysis. 
 
CS104.  Programming for Everyone II (3). 
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of data 
access, data management, and expands upon the topics 
learned in CS103.  Students will work with different data 
formats (HTML, XML, and JSON), and be introduced to 
the fundamentals of Structured Query Language and 
database design as part of a multi-step data gathering, 
analysis and processing effort.  As part of the course, 
students will build Web crawlers and multi-step data 
gathering and visualization processes.  (Prerequisite: 
CS103). 
 
CS110.  Web Development (3). 
Web Development introduces students to HTML, CSS, and 
JavaScript- the core technologies which power modern 
websites.  Students will learn how to create interactive, 
aesthetically pleasing websites for a variety of purposes.  
This course culminates with a project in which students 
will build a website for a real or imaginary product of their 
choosing.  (Prerequisite: CS103). 
 
CS151. Introduction to Games (3). 
Games sit at the intersection of technology, art, and culture, 
so success within the games industry requires you to 
understand all three. This course explores why we love 
games, what role they play in society, and the industry that 
produces them. You’ll also learn the basics of game 
development. This course was developed in partnership 
with Unity and the IGDA to help everyone interested in the 
games industry start on the right foot. 
 
CS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
Fall, Spring, May and Summer. 
 
CS203.  Introduction to C (3). 
This course introduces students to the techniques used to 
program in C and the necessary concepts required to 
understand how higher-level programming languages are 
developed.  The concepts introduced here will help 
students develop inherent understanding of how computers 
turn high-level code into ones and zeros and help students 
build more efficient programs.  (Prerequisites: CS104 and 
MATH204). 
 
CS221. Introduction to Information Technology 
Systems (3). 
Information Technology continues to be one of the most 
important topics in the modern workforce. This course will 
introduce you to the fundamentals of the field and teach 
you a range of valuable professional skills, including how 
to set up operating systems, how to troubleshoot problems, 
and how to build a computer. By the end of this course, 
you’ll be prepared to take your next steps in IT and start 
solving technology problems on your own. (Prerequisite: 
CS100 or CS101) 
 
 
CS222.  Microprocessors (3). 
This course is intended as an introduction to computer 
hardware and builds upon topics learned in CS203.  It 
covers the techniques used to design and build 
microprocessors, memory, and other elements of modern-
day hardware.  Students will learn the fundamentals of 
machine language and assembly language.  Students will 
also analyze the C compiler and learn how it produces the 
necessary strings of ones and zeros that will run on the 
hardware.  (Prerequisites: CS203 and MATH135). 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
210 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
CS224.  Networking Technologies and 
Telecommunications (3). 
Whether a workplace is just a few people connected to a 
wireless router, or a financial giant, wired directly into the 
Nasdaq, it likely relies heavily on Network Technologies. 
This course will teach you how networks work, and how to 
set up and secure them. By the end of this course, you will 
be able to manage and maintain a range of different 
network types.(Prerequisite: CS221) 
 
CS241.  Cloud Computing Foundations (3). 
This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of 
Cloud Computing, Infrastructure and Networking, and will 
explore how the cloud is used in a range of situations, 
including IT, App Development and Machine Learning. By 
the end of the course, students will know what the cloud is, 
and how to use it effectively. This course uses the Google 
Cloud Platform (GCP) and was built in concert with the 
Google Cloud Learning Services team. (Prerequisite: 
CS104) 
 
CS242.  Data Structures (3). 
This course will introduce students to the fundamental data 
structures using Python.  Students will learn what a data 
structure is, how to perform a range of operations on them, 
and be introduced to the study of algorithms as it pertains 
to the covered data structures.  Topics include linked lists, 
arrays, stack, queue, tree, graph, heap, hash, and algorithm 
basics (searching and sorting).  (Prerequisites: CS104 and 
MATH135). 
 
CS251.  Content & Systems Design (3).  
If you’ve ever enjoyed the experience of playing a video 
game, you’ve had a first-hand lesson in how important 
content and systems design are. The experience of a game 
is driven by four major components: content, systems, 
narrative, and user experience. This class will help you 
learn to design all four components and build a deeper 
understanding of the game development process and an 
introduction to concepts in scripting. (Prerequisite: CS151) 
 
 
 
CS271.  Foundations of Data Analytics I (3). 
In an increasingly data-driven world, everyone should be 
able to understand the numbers that govern our lives. 
Whether or not you want to work as a data analyst, being 
“data literate” will help you in your chosen field. In this 
course, you’ll learn the core concepts of inference and data 
analysis by working with real data. By the end of the term, 
you’ll be able to analyze large datasets and present your 
results. 
 
CS272. Foundations of Data Analytics II (3). 
This course is intended as a continuation of Foundations of 
Data Analytics I. In this course, you’ll learn how Data 
Analytics are applied within the workforce. Particular 
attention will be paid to the role of the Data Scientist or 
Analyst, machine learning and the applications of Big 
Data. By the end of the term, you will be able to design and 
execute a range of data driven experiments. (Prerequisite: 
CS271) 
 
CS283.  PostgreSQL (3). 
Whether a workplace is just a few people connected to a 
wireless router, or a financial giant, wired directly into the 
Nasdaq, it likely relies heavily on Network Technologies. 
This course will teach you how networks work, and how to 
set up, and secure them. By the end of this course, you will 
be able to manage and maintain a range of different 
network types.(Prerequisite: CS221) 
 
CS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
 
CS300.  Special Topics in Computer Science (3). 
This course covers new advanced areas in Computer 
Science not covered in any previous course in the program.  
It may be repeated with a different topic.  (Prerequisite: 
Junior Standing). 
 
CS302.  C# Programming (3). 
C# is a modern, general-purpose, object-oriented 
programming language with a range of uses, most notably 
creating desktop applications, web applications, web 
services and building games using the Unity engine. This 
course is intended to give students a working knowledge of 
the C# (v8.0) programming language and the .NET 
framework, as well as an understanding of C#’s application 
to the Unity Game Development Engine. (Prerequisite: 
CS242) 
 
CS311.  Application Development I (3). 
This is the first course in the Application Development 
series.  It explores Web application and introduces Django- 
a Python-based framework used in the creation of complex 
data-driven websites.  Students will learn the features and 
particularities of Django, as well as the basics of Web 
applications including HTML, the Request-Response 
structure, database management, and the internal structure 
of servers.  In addition to data structures and modules in 
Python.  (Prerequisite: CS104). 
 
CS312.  Application Development II (3). 
Course Descriptions 
 
211 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
This course is the second course in the Application 
Development series, students will build a Web application 
to post classified ads, plan and build their own unique Web 
application.  The course heavily emphasizes project-based 
learning.  (Prerequisite: CS311). 
 
CS323.  Computer Organization and Architecture (4). 
This course covers the fundamental knowledge areas of 
computer organization and architecture.  Topics include 
data representation, basic digital logic circuits, memory 
types and hierarchies, I/O and storage devices, CPU 
architectures such as RISC, CISC, parallel and multi-core.  
Three hours of lectures, two hours of laboratory work per 
week.  (Prerequisite: CS222). 
 
CS324.  Operating Systems and Computer  
Networks (4). 
The course introduces the fundamental concepts of 
operating systems and computer networks.  Operating 
systems’ topics include, operating systems operations, 
resource management, inter-process communications, 
security and protection, and distributed systems.  Computer 
Networks’ topics include, OSI model, TCP/IP model, 
network topologies, LANs, WANs, client-server systems, 
protocols, network management, IP addressing, Internet 
routing algorithms.  Three hours of lectures, two hours of 
laboratory work per week.  (Prerequisite: CS323). 
 
CS341.  Algorithms (3). 
The course explores algorithms from a coding-focused 
perspective.  Using Python, students will become familiar 
with concepts of runtime, recursion, implementation, and 
evaluation.  Topics include algorithm design paradigms, 
divide, and conquer algorithms, dynamic programming 
algorithms, greedy algorithms, graph searching and 
traversal, computational complexity, P vs. NP 
completeness.  (Prerequisites: CS242). 
 
CS349.  Cloud Applications Practicum (3) 
Software engineers are frequently tasked with building 
applications using unfamiliar elements. This course will 
ask you to build an application using the Google Cloud 
Platform and one or more unfamiliar technologies or tools 
you select. By the end of this course, you will learn how to 
tackle unfamiliar situations, a key skill for any 
programmer, and improve your skills in programming and 
software development. This course will provide you with a 
project to add to your portfolio of work. (Prerequisite: 
CS241, CS242, and CS312) 
 
CS351.  Software Engineering (3). 
The course introduces the fundamental and general 
technique concepts in software engineering.  Topics 
include software process structure, process models, agile 
development, requirements, design, implementation, 
validation, testing, maintenance, documentation, and 
security engineering.  Students will work on group 
projects.  (Prerequisites: CS104 and CS110). 
 
CS353.  Unity I:  Working with Unity (3). 
The Unity engine powers nearly 50% of all games and 
nearly 75% of mobile games. This course, built in 
collaboration with Unity and the IGDA, will introduce you 
to developing games in Unity. By the end of this course, 
you'll learn how to build a fully functioning game within 
the Unity system, including all key elements. (Prerequisite: 
CS251) 
 
CS355.  Writing for Computer Science (3) 
Students will practice professional writing in Computer 
Science and learn the different software engineering 
processes. Students will develop a software application and 
apply different forms of writing. This involves learning to 
combine text and graphics to explain in writing. Students 
will learn how to conduct proper research to write a well-
structured and formatted research paper. In addition, 
students will practice informal writing, work in group 
setting and develop presentation skills. (Prerequisite CS104 
and/or CS203) 
 
CS371.  Principles and Techniques of Data Analytics I 
(3). 
Data Analytics combines data, computation and inferential 
thinking to solve challenging problems and understand 
their intricacies. This class explores key principles and 
techniques of data science, and teaches students how to 
create informative data visualizations. It also explores 
particular concepts of Linear Algebra which are central to 
Data Science. (Prerequisites: CS104, CS272, MATH135, 
MATH204) 
 
CSC372.  Principles and Techniques of Data Analytics 
II (3). 
This course builds on Principles and Techniques of Data 
Analytics I to provide students with a more robust 
understanding of the tools of a Data Scientist. This class 
explores key principles and techniques of data science, 
including quantitative critical thinking and algorithms for 
machine learning methods. It will also introduce students 
to the ways in which data analytics is deployed in 
healthcare, marketing, political science, criminal justice, 
and other fields. (Prerequisite: CS371) 
 
CS381.  Database Management Systems (3). 
This course introduces database management systems.  
Topics include database management, database system 
Course Descriptions 
 
212 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
architecture, relational databases, SQL, domains, relations, 
relational algebra, relational calculus, integrity, views, 
normalization, database security, database connectivity, 
and database programming.  (Prerequisites: CS104 and 
CS110). 
 
CS399.  Professional Internship (1-6).  
The professional internship will provide an opportunity for 
students to develop job related skills and bring them in 
contact with professionals in the field.  The internship 
should be through the Institute for Career Planning and 
approved by the Department Chair.  Students will make a 
formal presentation to the department.  (Prerequisite: Junior 
or Senior standing and Department Chair approval 
required). 
 
 
CS400.  Advanced Topics in Computer Science (3). 
This course covers new advanced areas in Computer 
Science not covered in any previous course in the program.  
This course may be repeated with a different topic.  
(Prerequisite: Senior standing). 
 
CS401.  Theory of Computation (3). 
This course introduces the theory of computation through a 
set of abstract machines- finite automata, pushdown 
automata, and Turing machines- and examines the 
relationship between these automata and formal languages.  
(Prerequisite: CS341). 
 
CS403.  Parallel and Distributed Computing (3). 
This course will introduce parallel and distributed 
computing.  It covers a broad range of topics related to 
parallel and distributed computing, including architectures 
and systems, programming paradigms, algorithms, and 
other applications of parallel and distributed computing.  
(Prerequisites: CS203 and CS242). 
 
CS411.  Product Development (3). 
In this course, students will learn the roles and frameworks 
of product development.  Students will engage in a range 
of activities primarily focused on product management- 
including wire framing, creating user journeys, and writing 
requirements.  (Prerequisite: Junior standing). 
 
CS421.  Information Security and Data Protection (3). 
Imagine a world where people were trying to steal from 
every home, workplace or bank – all the time. That’s the 
world of digital security. Because it’s cheap to launch 
attacks on every system you can find, virtually every 
organization and individual is always under some level of 
digital attack. This course will teach you how to help 
defend against this constant assault and keep valuable 
information and critical systems safe. (Prerequisites: 
CS104 and CS324) 
 
CS429.  Information Technology Capstone (3). 
In previous courses you’ve learned how to solve problems 
as they occur, and how to address the various components 
that make up an organization’s IT ecosystem. This course 
will put it all together. You’ll learn how to solve systemic 
problems across all layers of an organization and guide 
transformational change. By the end of this course, not 
only will you know how to solve IT problems as they arise, 
you’ll be able to prevent those problems from happening in 
the future. (Prerequisites: CS421, MGMT342, and Senior 
Standing) 
 
CS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Supervised reading and research in a special interest area of 
Computer Science. (Prerequisite: permission of department 
and instructor’s approval of a written proposal that is 
submitted to the department prior to registration for the 
course). Fall, Spring, May and Summer. 
 
CS453.  Unity II: Advanced Unity Programming (3) 
This course, built in collaboration with Unity, is intended 
to provide students with the knowledge to bring their 
mastery of the Unity game engine and C# programming up 
to a professional standard. Students will learn how to 
perform a range of vital code-based tasks within the Unity 
platform, and will grow their skills in building core 
gameplay functionality. Upon successful completion, 
students will be prepared to sit for the Unity Certified 
Programmer exam. (Prerequisite: CS353) 
 
CS459.  Capstone Project: Building a Game (3). 
This course is intended as a culmination of all a student’s 
work in the Unity Game Development major. Students will 
work in groups to build a game in the unity engine that 
uses real-time 2D or 3D visuals and showcases their 
understanding of the core principles of game design. 
Students will pitch their game, design, prototype, build and 
test their game. Students will be evaluated based on the 
quality of their game, and their internal project 
management processes. (Prerequisites: CS341 and CS453) 
 
CS463.  Cryptography (3). 
This course will introduce students to cryptography and 
data security.  Topics include stream ciphers, data 
encryption standard (DES) and alternatives, advanced 
encryption standard (AES), block ciphers, public key 
cryptography, RSA cryptosystems, digital signatures, and 
hash function.  (Prerequisite: CS401). 
 
CS473.  Artificial Intelligence (3). 
Course Descriptions 
 
213 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
This course provides students with the fundamental 
knowledge for understanding Artificial Intelligence.  
Topics include intelligent agents, knowledge-based and 
search-based methods for problem solving and inferences, 
pattern recognition, fuzzy logic, and neural networks.  
(Prerequisites: CS341 and MATH303). 
 
CS476.  Machine Learning (3). 
This course will introduce students to machine learning.  
Topics include regression, classification, mixture models, 
neural networks, deep learning ensemble methods and 
reinforcement learning.  (Prerequisite: CS473). 
 
CS479.  Data Analytics Practicum (3). 
This course is a capstone project in which students are 
asked to work through a full data science workflow on a set 
of real data drawn from sports, politics, business or public 
health. This course exists to prepare students for the kind 
of work they will do on Data Science or Analytics teams, 
and as such, also features an emphasis on interviewing for 
jobs in the space and communicating results to 
stakeholders. (Prerequisites: CS242. CS372, and Senior 
Standing) 
 
CS490.  Capstone Project (3). 
Independent project on a Computer Science problem topic 
approved by the department, and under the supervision of a 
Computer Science department faculty member.  The 
students will carry out research on the topic, develop, 
design, and implement a programming solution.  By the 
end of this course, students will submit a well-written 
report and present their work to the department.  For 
Computer Science majors only.  (Prerequisite: Senior 
standing or Department Chair approval required). 
 
CS491.  Computer Science Practicum (3). 
Students will work in groups to launch a web app 
prototype.  The project should use database concepts, data 
structures and algorithms, and meets faculty approval.  
Students will pitch their product, select the necessary 
technologies, work in groups to build an application, and 
create a webpage from which the application can be 
accessed.  Students will be evaluated based on whether 
their product meetings the goals they initially established, 
and on their internal project management processes.  
(Prerequisite: Senior standing). 
 
CS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Critical Communication 
Competencies (CCC) 
 
CCC101.  College Writing and Inquiry (3). 
CCC101 provides foundational knowledge and practice in 
communication proficiency and information literacy.  The 
primary focus of the course is the writing and research 
process. Fall,  
 
CCC102.  Public Speaking (3). 
CCC102 builds on communication proficiency and 
information literacy skills developed in CCC101.  The 
primary focus of the course is public speaking and the 
research process.  (Prerequisite: CCC101).  Fall,  
 
 
Courses in Cybersecurity Management 
(CYM) 
 
CYM170.   Introduction to Cybersecurity (3). 
In today’s world, no one is safe from cyber-attacks, but 
everyone can be prepared. This course will teach you how 
malicious actors use social skills and technology to 
facilitate cyber attacks and provide you with the tools and 
information you need to defend against those attacks. 
Whether you pursue one of the many available jobs in 
cybersecurity or just want to secure your own privacy, you 
will learn how to make the internet safer. 
 
CYM270.  Cybercrime and Governance (3). 
Cybercrime is one of the biggest threats companies face on 
a daily basis, and they are constantly looking for new hires 
to help protect them. In this course, you will get a firsthand 
look at the methods used to commit cybercrimes. You will 
also learn how governments detect, investigate, and stop 
these crimes, and become familiar with the laws and 
policies in place to deter cybercriminals. (Prerequisite: 
CYM170) 
 
CYM370.  Modern Cybersecurity (3). 
Just as technology is constantly evolving, so too must 
cybersecurity to keep pace with changing trends. In this 
class, you will learn about the changing landscape of 
cybersecurity, emerging technologies that are likely to be 
targeted, and new forms of cyber-attack being launched. 
By the end of the course, you will be able to implement the 
most up-to-date practices in cybersecurity in order to 
protect against attacks. (Prerequisite: CYM170) 
 
CYM371.  Network and Systems Security (3). 
Modern organizations know that even the strongest 
systems can be vulnerable to cyber-attacks. As a result, 
jobs in cybersecurity are rapidly expanding as companies 
look to secure their digital assets. This course will teach 
you how to secure those assets by identifying and fixing 
Course Descriptions 
 
214 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
potential security vulnerabilities. By the end of the course, 
you will be able to identify and remedy common network 
and systems vulnerabilities. (Prerequisite: CYM170) 
 
CYM372.  Cyber Forensics (3) 
When cybercrimes do happen, you need to know how to 
respond. This course examines the tools and techniques 
used to perform cyber forensics and conduct investigations 
into cybercrimes. By the end of the course, you’ll be able 
to gather and analyze important digital evidence and gain 
skills in analyzing cybercrime that are in demand from 
companies across the country. (Prerequisite: CYM270) 
 
CYM470.  Capstone: Ethical Hacking (3). 
To stop a hacker, you need to be able to think like a hacker. 
In this course, you will learn hands-on techniques for 
attacking and penetrating networks and systems. You will 
be prepped with tools to launch these offensive tactics, and 
then complete a hands-on project where they are asked to 
ethically hack a real system. (Prerequisite: CYM371) 
 
Courses in Dance (DANC) 
 
To fulfill the Arts general distribution requirements using 
dance courses, students must complete 3 hours in dance. 
 
DANC100.  Dance Fundamentals (1) (ARTS). 
Introduction to dance as a performing art, focusing on the 
Western European dance forms of classical ballet, jazz, and 
modern.  Emphasis on alignment and basic movement 
vocabulary. Designed for students with little or no 
experience. 
 
DANC110.  Modern I (1) (ARTS). 
A study of basic techniques in modern dance. Fundamental 
warm up exercises are taught, followed by center practice 
and combinations of dance steps. (Prerequisite: DANC100).  
Fall of odd years. 
 
DANC120.  Jazz Dance I (1) (ARTS). 
Study of basic techniques in jazz dance. Fundamental warm 
up exercises are taught, followed by center practice and 
combinations of dance steps. (Prerequisite: DANC100).  
Spring of odd years. 
 
DANC130.  Ballet I (1) (ARTS). 
Study of basic techniques in ballet.  Fundamental ballet 
exercises are taught at the barre, followed by center practice 
and combinations of dance steps. (Prerequisite: DANC100).  
Fall of even years. 
 
DANC140.  Tap I (1) (ARTS). 
Fundamentals of tap dance. Students must provide their own 
tap shoes. (Prerequisite: DANC100).  Spring of even years. 
 
DANC150.  Dance Workshop I (1).  
Explores various dance styles through the preparation and 
performance of solo and group dance. This course provides 
practical experience and develops skills for performances 
and auditions. (Prerequisite: one previous DANC course).  
 
 
DANC199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
DANC200.  Musical Theatre Dance (1) (ARTS). 
Musical theatre choreography and techniques with emphasis 
on original Broadway choreography and dance routines 
original 
to 
Broadway-style 
music. 
(Prerequisite: 
DANC100).  Spring of odd years. 
 
DANC210.  Modern II (1) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in modern dance at the intermediate 
level. Increased complexity of warm up exercises are taught, 
followed by center practice and combinations of dance 
steps. (Prerequisite: DANC110).  Spring of even years. 
 
DANC220.  Jazz Dance II (1) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in Jazz dance at the intermediate level.  
Increased complexity of warm up and center practice will 
focus on increasing strength and flexibility building on the 
basics introduced in Jazz Dance I. (Prerequisite: 
DANC120).  Fall of odd years. 
 
DANC230.  Ballet II (1) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in ballet at the intermediate level.  
Increased complexity of ballet exercises are taught at the 
barre, followed by center practice and combinations of 
dance steps. (Prerequisite: DANC130).  Spring of odd years. 
 
DANC299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
DANC240.  Tap II (1) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in tap dance at the intermediate level.  
Increased complexity of tap exercises with rhythm are 
taught.  Students are expected to provide their own shoes.  
(Prerequisite: DANC140).  Fall of even years. 
 
DANC250.  Dance Workshop II (1).  
Explores various dance styles through the preparation and 
performance of solo and group dance. This course provides 
practical experience and develops skills for performances 
and auditions. (Prerequisite: DANC150).   
 
DANC290.  Mechanics of Movement for Dancers (3). 
Course Descriptions 
 
215 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Focusing on human skeletal and muscular anatomy and its 
relationship to movement skills and postural alignment, the 
course will analyze gravity and its effect on posture and 
muscular function.  Additionally, the course examines the 
principles of alignment, conditioning, and injury prevention. 
(Prerequisite: DANC100).  Fall of even years. 
 
DANC320.  Jazz Dance III (2) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in Jazz dance at the advanced level. 
Students improve their dance technique, dynamic, spatial 
and performance skills. Syncopation, improvisation, 
phrasing and complex movement combinations are 
emphasized building on the techniques introduced in Jazz 
Dance I and II. Students will analyze and critique dance 
technique and choreography. (Prerequisite: DANC220).  
Spring of even years.  
 
DANC330.  Ballet III (2) (ARTS). 
Study of techniques in ballet dance at the advanced level.  
Students improve their dance technique, alignment, 
dynamic, spatial, musical, and performance skills. Students 
will analyze and critique dance technique and choreography. 
(Prerequisite: DANC230).  Fall of odd years. 
 
DANC350.  Dance Workshop III (1). 
Explores various dance styles through the preparation and 
performance of solo and group dance.  Emphasis on 
choreographic skills. This course provides practical 
experience and develops skills for performances and 
auditions. (Prerequisite: DANC250).   
 
DANC360.  Musical Theatre Dance Composition &  
Choreography (2). 
Through Musical theatre repertoire, the performer will 
examine the structure of stage choreography through dance 
theme, construction of dances and small group studies. 
Aesthetic 
considerations, 
forms, 
and 
elements 
of 
performance 
with 
an 
emphasis 
on 
showmanship. 
(Prerequisite DANC200).  Fall of odd years. 
 
DANC370.  Dance Composition & Choreography (2). 
Selection of dance theme, construction of dances and small 
group studies. Aesthetic considerations, forms, and elements 
of performance. (Prerequisite: DANC220 or DANC230).  
Spring of even years. 
 
DANC380.  Western Dance History (3) (ARTS). 
A survey of Western dance from 15th century European 
court dance to the present.  Explores the origins of theatrical 
dance forms, from the development of ballet, the revolutions 
of Modern Dance, to contemporary choreographic 
innovators and performance practices. (Prerequisite: Must 
have successfully passed any Writing Intensive course).  
Spring of odd years. 
DANC399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
(May Term limited to 4 credit hours; Summer Term limited 
to 6 credit hours). 
 
DANC451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Supervised reading and research in a special interest area of 
dance. (Prerequisite: department permission and instructor’s 
approval of a written proposal that is submitted to the 
department prior to registration for the course). Fall, Spring, 
May and Summer. 
 
DANC499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Economics (ECON) 
 
ECON199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
ECON201.  Principles of Microeconomics (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
Introductory microeconomic theory emphasizes central goal 
of microeconomics: efficient decision making choices 
involving scarcity. The topics of markets, demand-supply 
relationships, role of government, choices made by 
consumers and firms, market structure, and factor markets 
are included. The lives and works of important economists 
are also studied. Open to freshmen; may be taken before or 
after ECON202. Fall,  
 
ECON202.  Principles of Macroeconomics (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
This course emphasizes economic stability and covers an 
introduction 
to 
economics 
and 
key 
concepts 
in 
macroeconomics including GDP, growth, unemployment, 
inflation, business cycles, money and baking system, 
monetary policy and fiscal policy. (Prerequisite: MATH101 
or Math Placement Examination).  Open to freshmen; may 
be taken before or after ECON201.  Fall,  
 
ECON223.  Economics of Developing Countries (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE, NON-WESTERN).  
Economic conditions of developing countries and causes of 
their slow growth, including a survey of the theories of 
economic development. The topics of the relationship of 
developing countries with developed countries, and with 
various international agencies such as the United Nations 
and the World Bank are included.  Open to freshmen. Fall  
 
ECON299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ECON301.  Economics of Money & Banking (3).    
Course Descriptions 
 
216 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Definition and role of money in the economy: classical, 
Keynesian and modern views will be covered.  Brief 
discussion of how banking system creates money.  Role and 
management of money in an international context. 
(Prerequisite: ECON202).  
 
ECON302.  Financial Markets & Institutions (3). 
The course provides a comprehensive view of how financial 
markets and institutions function.  This course analyzes all 
major types of financial markets, including money market, 
bond market, mortgage market, equity market and 
derivatives (futures, options and swaps).  (Prerequisite: 
ECON202).  Offered as needed. 
 
ECON303.  Quantitative Methods in Economics (3).   
The course focuses on the basic mathematical and statistical 
concepts used in economic analysis, including various ways 
economic information can be graphed to show issues such 
as income and wealth distribution.  The graphical analysis 
discussed in the two Principles courses will be covered in 
greater depth with added variables. (Prerequisites: 
ECON201 and ECON202). 
 
ECON305.  Political Economy (3).   
Analysis of government from an economic perspective 
through the lens of public choice theory, with emphasis on 
rent-seeking behavior, market distorting effects of 
government regulation and inefficiencies in collective 
decision-making.  Students who have taken PSCI 305 may 
not take this course for credit.  (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI 
or ECON course). Offered as needed 
 
ECON310.  Public Finance (3).  
Topics 
include 
principles 
of 
fiscal 
development, 
countercyclical effectiveness of fiscal measures, budgeting, 
revenue generation and public expenditures, debt structure 
and management, and the incidence and effects of taxation. 
A fully developed flow chart model is used to trace the 
relationship between public finance and macroeconomic 
ideas.  (Prerequisites: ECON201 and ECON202).. 
 
ECON311.  Topics in Economics (1-4).  
Special topics including but not limited to the economics of 
social welfare, contemporary economic issues and the 
economics of ethnic groups. Offered occasionally. 
 
ECON315.  Globalization (3).  
The structure and effects of global economic, political, and 
cultural integration, and the mechanisms of international 
governance  Students who have taken PSCI 315 may not 
take this course for credit (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI or 
ECON course) Offered as needed.   
 
ECON317.  Collective Bargaining & Labor  
Problems (3).  
Economic factors involved in labor analysis and an 
examination of the topics of labor unrest, labor and 
management organizations and recent developments in labor 
relations. The course begins with a history of the labor 
movement and concludes with a consideration of modern 
labor legislation. (Prerequisites: ECON201 and ECON202).  
 
ECON319.  International Economics (3).  
Topics include the balance of payments, comparative costs, 
general equilibrium theory, price elasticity, income 
absorption combined approaches to currency revaluation 
and devaluation problems, foreign exchange problems, and 
international trade and finance policy considerations. A fully 
developed flow chart model is used to trace the relationship 
between international trade and macroeconomic ideas.  
(Prerequisites: ECON201 and ECON202).   
 
ECON320.  Intermediate Macroeconomics (3).  
Aggregate economic theory of consumption, investment, 
savings, money, interest,  price level and economic growth, 
and fluctuations of national income and employment.  The 
course thoroughly investigates Keynesian and Classical 
economic ideas related to macroeconomic stability of a 
country.  A fully developed flow chart model is used to 
develop major macroeconomic ideas.  (Prerequisite: 
ECON202).  
 
ECON321.  Intermediate Microeconomics (3).  
The focus of the course is efficient resource allocation using 
advanced analytical economic tools. Topics include price 
and market analysis, allocation of resources, theory of 
consumer preferences, general equilibrium and welfare 
economics, and distribution of income.  (Prerequisites: 
ECON201 and ECON202)  Fall of odd years. 
 
ECON322.  Econometrics (3).  
The construction of economic models using mathematical 
techniques for the purpose of testing economic theory 
empirically and forecasting economic events. (Prerequisites: 
ECON320, ECON321 and MATH204).  
 
ECON325.  Behavioral Economics (3). 
The study of emotional, cognitive, and psychological 
influences on decision making.  Incorporates results from 
psychology to gain deeper insight into economic behavior, 
to make better predictions, and to generate improved policy 
decisions.  (Prerequisite: ECON201).   
 
ECON399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ECON401.  Capstone: Senior Research (2).  
Course Descriptions 
 
217 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Independent study on an economic topic approved by the 
department, requiring preparation of a well-researched 
paper, under the supervision of an economics department 
faculty member. For economics majors only. (Prerequisite: 
senior status or permission of department).  
ECON451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Intensive study on an economic topic approved by the 
department, requiring preparation of a well-researched 
paper, under the supervision of an economics department 
faculty member. In addition, a number of current economics 
concepts will also be covered to prepare the economics 
student for professional work.  For ECON minors only. 
Offered as needed. 
 
ECON499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in English (ENGL) 
 
ENGL102.  Human Textuality: Introduction to English  
Studies (3) (HUMANITIES). 
An exploration of the way texts shape and respond to 
human activity and meaning in the world.  Students will 
learn how literature and writing intersect, and how they can 
apply that knowledge in their academic, professional, 
personal, and public lives.  Fall. 
 
ENGL151.   Publications Activities (1). 
Basics of writing, editing, and producing student 
publications, both print and online, including the student 
newspaper and literary magazine.  Cross-listed with 
JRNL151.  Open to all students.  Course may be repeated 
up to 3 times. 
 
ENGL199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
ENGL201.  Persuasive Writing (3) 
(WRITING INTENSIVE). 
Study-practice of writing and analyzing arguments across 
disciplines in order to understand and respond to knowledge 
claims from a range of sources.  Emphasis on reasoning, 
information literacy, and rhetorical strategies of persuasive 
argumentation.  (Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in 
CCC101 or equivalent transfer course credit). Fall, Spring 
 
ENGL203.  Creative Writing (3) (HUMANITIES).  
The writing of poetry, fiction, or plays at an introductory 
level. The course offers coaching about craft issues and 
includes study of professional texts. Course will include 
small-group workshops and conferences with instructor. 
(Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in CCC101 or equivalent 
transfer course credit). Fall,  
 
ENGL208.  Introduction to British Literature (3) 
(Humanities) 
A broad selection of British Literary works from the Middle 
Ages to the present. Students will explore a range of genres 
and influential authors in historical context. Open to first-
year students.  
ENGL210.  Introduction to American Literature (3) 
(HUMANITIES). 
A broad selection of American Literary works from the 
Native American Oral Literature to the present Students 
will explore a range of genres and influential authors in 
historical context Open to first-year students.   
 
ENGL231.  Issues in Writing Studies (3).  
An introduction to the theories and issues of writing studies, 
including rhetoric, language, literacy, and professional 
writing.  (Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in CCC101 or 
equivalent transfer course credit). Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL240.  Special Topics in Writing (3).  
An exploration of different topics in writing studies. 
(Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in CCC101 or equivalent 
transfer course credit). Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL250.  Special Topics in Literature (3)  
(HUMANITIES).  
A study of literature and cultural contexts designed around 
a theme or topic. The course will have significant writing 
and research components.  Open to first-year students.  
Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL255.  Studies in Non-Western Literature (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN).  
Literary works outside the traditions of European and 
American literature. The works studied may vary greatly 
from year to year.  Open to first-year students. 
  
ENGL285.  Literature in Focus (1-2).  
A reading and discussion course typically concentrating on 
one long work of literature, such as Tom Jones, 
Middlemarch or Ulysses. May be taken four times with 
different subjects. Open to first-year students. 
 
ENGL299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ENGL303.  Advanced Writing (3). 
Advanced writing experience and study focusing on the 
genre of creative nonfiction and professional texts.  Students 
revise toward professional-level performance.  Includes 
small group writing workshops and conferences with 
Course Descriptions 
 
218 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
instructor.  (Prerequisites: ENGL203 and one additional 
200-level ENGL or JRNL course). Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL304.  Advanced Creative Writing: Poetry (3).  
Advanced writing experience focusing on poetry. Includes 
coaching, writing experience and the study of professional 
texts. Students will revise toward professional-level 
performance. Includes small-group writing workshops and 
conferences with instructor. (Prerequisite: ENGL203). 
Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL305.  Advanced Creative Writing: Fiction (3).  
Advanced writing experience focusing on fiction. Includes 
coaching, writing experience and the study of professional 
texts. Students will revise toward professional-level 
performance. Includes small-group writing workshops and 
conferences with instructor. (Prerequisite: ENGL203). 
Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL306.  Advanced Creative Writing: Drama (3).  
Advanced writing experience focusing on drama. Includes 
coaching, writing experience and the study of professional 
texts. Students will revise toward professional-level 
performance. Includes small-group writing workshops and 
conferences with instructor. (Prerequisite: ENGL203).  
Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL310.  Teaching Writing (3).  
For K-12+ prospective teachers of English.  Study of 
teaching philosophies and methods in the field of writing.  
Includes experience working with students from local 
schools, writing workshops, and individual conferences with 
instructor. (Prerequisite: ENGL231 or ENGL332). Fall. 
 
ENGL330.  Advanced Topics in Literature (3). 
An advanced study of literature and cultural contexts 
designed around a theme or topic.  The course will have 
significant writing and research components.  May be 
repeated.  (Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in any 200-
level English literature course).  Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL332.  English Language (3).  
A study of the form, structure and history of English. Topics 
may include grammar, syntax, language acquisition, sound 
and structure changes, the influence of migration and the 
political 
implications 
of 
language. 
(Prerequisite: 
ENGL231).  
 
ENGL352.  Shakespeare (3).   
A selection of Shakespeare’s plays including comedies, 
tragedies, histories and or romances. (Prerequisite: a grade 
of C or better in any 200-level ENGL literature course). 
Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL358.  Intermediate Studies in British Literature 
(3). (Humanities) 
 Why is literature important? How does it shape our world? 
Through an in-depth exploration of British literature in 
historical context, students will pursue a focused study of 
significant works, genres, or movements. May be repeated.  
(Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in any 200-level English 
literature course).   
ENGL368.   Intermediate Studies in American 
Literature (3). (Humanities) 
Why is literature important?  How does it shape our world?  
Through an in-depth exploration of American literature in 
historical context, students will pursue a focused study of 
significant works, genres, or movements.  May be repeated.  
(Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in any 200-level English 
literature course).  Offered as needed. 
 
ENGL399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ENGL402.  Capstone (3). 
Examination and practice of research and project design in 
English Studies. Students will present their senior project to 
the department at the end of the term. (Prerequisites: 
ENGL231 and two additional 300-level English courses).  
Fall. 
 
ENGL451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Advanced study in areas beyond regular course offerings. 
(Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
ENGL499.  Advanced Experimental Course (3). 
 
Courses in Business Administration-  
Entrepreneurial  Studies (ENTR) 
 
ENTR199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
ENTR250.  Fundamentals of Entrepreneurship (3).  
Examines the role and develops the basic skill set of the 
entrepreneur in both start-up companies and more mature 
organizations. 
Topics 
covered 
include 
writing 
a 
prospectus/initial 
business 
plan, 
securing 
funding, 
developing new products/services, global sourcing and 
protecting intellectual property. Fall,    
 
ENTR251.   Entrepreneurial Speaker Series (1). 
Students will travel to the University of Michigan to attend 
their speaker series every Friday (transportation provided).  
This course provides an opportunity to listen to great 
entrepreneurial speaker from around the country.  (Co-
requisite: ENTR351).   
 
Course Descriptions 
 
219 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
ENTR299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ENTR351.  The Entrepreneurial Experience (3).  
An experiential based course providing opportunities to 
apply and refine the fundamental skills of entrepreneurship.  
Cases, interaction with professional, experiential challenges 
and a major entrepreneurial project are the primary 
pedagogical approaches used in this applied course.  
(Prerequisite: ENTR250). Fall,    
 
ENTR352.  Evolution of Entrepreneurship (3). 
A journey through the evolution of entrepreneurship.  
Students will sharpen their understanding of traits, events, 
skills and tools that were required, and gain fresh 
perspectives into the people, ideas and entrepreneurial 
processes that changes our realities.   
 
ENTR399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ENTR451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business department). 
 
ENTR455.  Entrepreneurial Practicum (3).  
This one semester supervised practicum in an approved 
entrepreneurial setting will connect and apply knowledge 
and techniques from multiple business, accounting and other 
courses to an entrepreneurial venture. The venue through 
which any practicum is offered may vary. (Prerequisites: 
ENTR351 and permission of instructor).   
 
ENTR499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Exercise Science and 
Athletic Training (ESAT) 
 
ESAT100.  Principles of Fitness (2) (FITNESS  
DEVELOPMENT). 
The basic principles of fitness, with emphasis on 
development of a wellness concept. Various physical 
assessments are used to determine a student’s level of fitness 
and individual programs are explored for the purpose of 
establishing room and laboratory experience. Required of all 
students, recommended for out-of-season athletes. Fall, 
 
 
ESAT101.  Physical Education Activities (1).  
The fundamental skills and techniques of various activities 
which students may select. May be repeated once with 
different activities. Additional fees for equestrian classes 
will apply. Fall,  
 
ESAT103.   Foundations & Careers in ESAT (2).  
Relationships among physical education, sport and 
recreation through history, including principles, objectives 
and programs. Various philosophies are explored as a basis 
for developing a personal philosophy relating to each area. 
Fall,  
 
ESAT199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
Does not count toward a departmental major. 
 
 
 
 
ESAT218.  Rhythmic Activities (1).  
The development of rhythmic movement principles taught 
in the elementary and secondary schools. Designed for 
elementary and secondary teachers. Open to freshmen. Fall. 
 
ESAT222.  Instructional Methods in Physical  
Education (3).  
Designed to provide experiences which will assist physical 
education majors and minors select developmentally 
appropriate 
motor 
activities, 
develop 
instructional 
materials, develop assessment techniques and management 
skills.  Fall. 
 
ESAT225.  Human Anatomy (3).  
An introduction to gross anatomical structure. Designed for 
exercise science/physical education majors and students in 
related fields of interest. Fall,  
 
ESAT226.  Human Anatomy Lab (1).  
A one semester survey of the structures of the human body, 
including dissections and discussions of cells, tissues, 
organs and systems.  (ESAT225 as a co-requisite or pre-
requisite) Offered as needed  
 
ESAT230.  Motor Learning & Development (3).  
Examination of motor skill acquisition and application to 
skill performance. Factors influencing motor learning such 
as growth and development, neural mechanisms, and 
optimal teaching strategies are explored. Fall. 
 
ESAT236.  Sports Technique I (2).  
Based on the Michigan Department of Education 
framework for invasion games and target games. (i.e. 
soccer, lacrosse, basketball, softball, golf, disc golf, 
ultimate) teacher candidates will acquire motor skills, 
knowledge and practical experiences working toward 
teacher certification. Open to freshmen.  
 
ESAT237.  Sports Technique II (2).  
Based on the Michigan Department of Education 
framework for net wall games (i.e. volleyball, pickle ball, 
Course Descriptions 
 
220 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
tennis, badminton) teacher candidates will acquire motor 
skills, knowledge and practical experiences working toward 
teacher certification. Open to freshmen. Fall. 
 
ESAT238.  Sports Technique III (2).  
Based on the Michigan Department of Education 
framework for rhythmic activities and fitness activities. (i.e. 
tumbling, fitness, bowling) teacher candidates will acquire 
motor skills, knowledge and practical experiences working 
toward teacher certification. Open to freshmen.  
 
ESAT240.  Introduction to Research (3). 
An introduction to research  methods as they apply to 
qualitative and quantitative design in exercise science. 
(Prerequisite: ESAT225). Fall,  
 
ESAT246.  Lifetime Fitness (3). 
Candidates will design, implement and instruct health and 
skill related fitness activities including functional strength 
and conditioning, rhythmic activities, cardiovascular group 
fitness, acquiring motor skills, knowledge and structured 
learning experiences to perform and teach in the P-12 
school systems. 
 
ESAT247.  Organizational Sports (2). 
Based on the Michigan Department of Education 
framework for invasion, net wall, target games and 
striking/fielding games for teacher candidates will acquire 
skills, knowledge, strategies, and rules wit practical 
experiences playing, teaching, skills, drills and games. 
 
ESAT248.  Outdoor Education and Lifetime  
Activities (2). 
Prepares students to facilitate team building, participate,  
design, implement and assess knowledge and lifelong skills 
of outdoor activities and promote an appreciation of the 
outdoors through experiential learning, and leadership (i.e. 
outdoor exploring, disc sports, navigation, leave no trace, 
outdoor sports). 
 
ESAT250.  Human Physiology (3).  
Introduction to physiological mechanisms which govern 
systemic organ function. Fall,  
 
ESAT256.  Human Physiology Lab (1).  
A one-semester survey of physiological concepts and 
functions via experimentation. (ESAT250 as a co-requisite 
or pre-requisite). Offered as needed. 
 
ESAT299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ESAT300.  Kinesiology (3).   
The theory and practical application of basic facts, laws, 
principles and concepts of biomechanical movement, with 
attention given to the physiological and anatomical study of 
muscles. (Prerequisites: ESAT225 and ESAT250). Fall, 
 
 
ESAT302.  Organization of Intramurals (2). 
The organization of a comprehensive intramural program, 
with major emphasis on philosophy, objectives, rules and 
policies, scheduling, reporting and promotional techniques.  
 
ESAT303.  Outdoor Pursuits (2).  
Prepares students to participate, design, implement, and 
assess knowledge and lifelong skills (i.e. archery, outdoor 
exploring, 
fishing 
activities, 
technical 
navigation). 
Coursework is based on Michigan Department of Education 
Physical Education Framework. (Prerequisite: T ED330 or 
permission of instructor). 
 
ESAT304.  Teaching Program Design of Strength &  
Conditioning (2).  
Candidates will design, implement and instruct a functional 
strength and conditioning class for high school.  Skills to be 
acquired: organizational set up and structure, pre-activity 
functional movements, proper dynamic and static flexibility, 
weight training techniques including Olympic movements 
and safety. (Prerequisite: T ED330 or permission of 
instructor). 
 
ESAT309.  Theory & Practice (1).  
Practical application of methods and techniques of teaching 
physical education activities. Students teach in the required 
exercise science physical education program. (Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor). Offered as needed. 
 
ESAT310.  Introduction to Phlebotomy (3).  
Students will learn how to perform phlebotomy by safely 
acquiring blood samples from the arm and hand using 
vacutainer, syringe, and butterfly methods.  Tube 
anticoagulants, order of draw, quality testing, and pre-
analytical topics are emphasized.  (Prerequisites: ESAT225 
and ESAT250, or permission of instructor).  Open to 
freshmen. 
 
ESAT311.  Exercise Physiology (3).  
A physiological examination of how the body responds and 
adapts to exercise. (Prerequisite: ESAT250; Co-requisite: 
ESAT350). Fall,   
 
ESAT312.  Sports Nutrition (3).  
The study of the metabolic and physiological responses of 
the body to diet including the acute and chronic effects of 
sports 
nutrition 
and 
supplementation 
on 
physical 
Course Descriptions 
 
221 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
performance. 
(Prerequisite: 
BIOL101, 
BIOL103 
or 
BIOL104).  Fall. 
 
ESAT316.  Health & Physical Education for the  
Classroom Teacher (3).  
This course will provide elementary classroom teachers with 
the opportunity to develop the functional knowledge, skills 
and behaviors to enhance students’ current health and 
physical activity as well as to develop life-long healthy 
lifestyles. Fall. 
 
ESAT333.  Adapted Physical Education (2).  
Practical approach to instruction of physical activity for 
special populations of diverse learners.  Effective 
instruction, accommodation of developmentally appropriate 
activities, equipment and instructional material for diverse 
learners are taught through lecture and practical experiences. 
 
ESAT339.  Principles of Strength & Conditioning (3).  
Integrates scientific principles, concepts, and theories of 
exercise to improve the condition of the physically active.  
Topics include scientific basis of training and conditioning, 
testing and assessment methods, exercise technique, 
periodization, and issues related to organization and 
administration 
of 
programs. 
This 
course 
provides 
preparatory information for various exercise certifications. 
(Prerequisites: ESAT225 and ESAT250).  
 
ESAT350.  Exercise Physiology Lab (1).  
This lab class accompanies the exercise physiology lecture.  
Activities and experiments involving various forms of 
exercise testing and the use of standardized equipment will 
be performed.  (Co-requisite: ESAT311). Fall,  
 
ESAT360.  Exercise and the Brain (2).  
The effects of exercise on cognitive function, energy 
balance, addiction, mood disorders and neurodegenerative 
diseases (Prerequisite: ESAT250).  
 
ESAT370.  Electrocardiogram (ECG) (3).  
The course examines cardiac anatomy, electrophysiology 
and basic cardiac rhythms with an emphasis on the 
recognition and interpretation of cardiac dysrhythmias. 
(Prerequisite: ESAT225).  
 
ESAT390.  Topics in Exercise Science. (1-6).  
An in-depth study of a special topic, which varies from 
semester to semester depending on specialties of the 
professor teaching the course. May be repeated with a 
different topic. Offered as needed. 
 
ESAT399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
The professional internship will provide an opportunity for 
students to test their career interests and develop job-related 
skills through college-approved work experiences and to 
bring them in contact with professionals in the field. 
Students will make a formal presentation following the 
conclusion of the internship. 
 
ESAT402.  Capstone: Administration of Physical  
Education & Sport (3).  
Capstone class for the physical education major emphasizes 
administration, program and curriculum design of physical 
education and physical activity programs including 
collaborative partnerships within the public schools and 
surrounding communities.  (Prerequisites: ESAT222 and T 
ED337). Spring 
 
 
ESAT404.  Capstone: Senior Seminar (2).  
Each student develops a research project, uses the 
appropriate methods and statistical tools, and analyzes data. 
The student will present the material in an oral presentation. 
(Prerequisite: ESAT240). Fall,  
 
ESAT451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
A program of supervised reading, research or work in an 
area of special interest to the student. (Prerequisite: 
permission of department). 
 
ESAT481.  Internship Seminar (1).   
Course to be taken with ESAT399, this course is designed 
to maximize the experiences learned through the 
professional internship.  Additional projects include a 
research proposal, culminating in an end of the semester 
presentation. (Co-requisite: ESAT399). 
 
ESAT499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Environmental Studies/Environmental 
Science (ESS) 
 
ESS104.  Regional Geography (3).  
An introduction to the geographic regions of the world. 
Topics include the physical and cultural characteristics of 
world regions, with discussion of current trends and future 
outlook. Does not count towards ESS elective credit for ESS 
majors or minors. Spring of even years.  
 
ESS110.  Introduction to Environmental Science (3). 
Introductory overview of topics in environmental science 
and studies, exploring the intersection of people and their 
biotic and abiotic environment. Topics may include 
biodiversity and conservation, weather and climate, air and 
Course Descriptions 
 
222 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
water pollution, agriculture and energy, among others. 
Students will engage in active learning approaches, 
including writing, speaking and discussion.  
 
ESS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
Does not count toward a departmental major. 
 
ESS201.  Weather & Climate (3).  
Introduces the nature and causes of weather and climate 
patterns. Topics include: temperature, humidity and 
precipitation; pressure and wind; weather prediction; 
hurricanes, tornadoes and thunderstorms; effect of human 
activities on weather and climate; and interrelationship 
between climate and ecosystems  (Does not satisfy the 
laboratory science requirement). Spring of odd years. 
 
 
 
ESS205.  Environmental Geology (4).  
The interaction between natural systems and society, 
including the effects of volcanic activity, earthquakes, 
landslides, 
mineral 
and 
energy 
resources, 
soil 
contamination, surface and ground water pollution, waste 
management, and climate change. Two lectures, one 3-hour 
laboratory 
per 
week. 
(Prerequisite: 
GEOL101 
or 
GEOL107). Fall. 
 
ESS305.  Paleoclimatology (2). 
Earth’s climate through geologic time, including the 
analysis of data and data repositories that record climate 
and their application to understanding climate history and 
modern climate change.  (Prerequisite: Completion of the 
Natural Science distribution).  Fall. 
 
ESS325.  Environmental Problems & Solutions (3).  
An investigation of current environmental problems and 
possible solutions offered from different perspectives. 
Students will prepare a proposal dealing with a possible 
solution to an environmental problem. The proposal will 
reflect the academic interest and perspective of each student 
(their minor or major) and will serve as preparation for 
ESS400. (Prerequisites: ESS110 and sophomore standing). 
 
 
ESS375.  Geographic Information & Positioning  
Systems (4). 
 Historical perspective of how maps are made and global 
positions determined and the current means of employing 
computer and satellite technology using geographic 
information systems (GIS) and global positioning systems 
(GPS). Three hours lecture, three hours laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisites: GEOL101, MATH115 and a 200-level BIOL 
or GEOL course). Offered as needed. 
 
ESS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
ESS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
ESS400.  Capstone: Senior Research (2).  
Original capstone research designed and carried out by 
student.  Data gathered will be used in ESS401, the second 
semester of Capstone Experience.  (Prerequisite: ESS325). 
Fall. 
 
ESS401.  Capstone: Research Presentation (1). 
Analysis, write up and presentation of results of research 
carried out in ESS400. (Prerequisite: ESS400).  
 
ESS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
A program of supervised reading, research or work in an 
area of special interest to the student. (Prerequisite: 
permission of department). 
ESS499.   Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Business Administration- 
 Event Planning (EVNT) 
 
EVNT199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
EVNT290.  Event Planning Principles (3). 
Overview of the event industry.  The techniques and 
procedures necessary to execute variety of events including 
corporate, social, sport, cultural, entertainment, fundraising, 
and publicity applications.  Introduction to the topics of 
program design and planning, site selection, timeliness, 
logistical preparation, contracts, budgeting, staffing, and 
risk.   
 
EVNT299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
EVNT390.  Event Production & Operations  
Management (3). 
Each event creates unique production issues.  Emphasis is 
placed on the decision-making necessary to produce 
successful and sustainable events.  Concept development, 
proposals and agreements, budgeting, generating revenues 
and other objectives, coordination between multiple 
stakeholders and service providers, monitoring and post-
event evaluation.  
(Prerequisite: EVNT290).   
 
EVNT391.  Event Risk Management (3). 
Risk is inherent anytime people gather for an event.  Risk 
factors are analyzed and strategies developed from both a 
proactive and post-crisis perspective to create and maintain 
Course Descriptions 
 
223 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
a secure environment for all event stakeholders.  An 
understanding of how each event venue requires its own risk 
management parameters are explored.  (Prerequisite: 
EVNT290).   
 
 
EVNT392.  Convention & Trade Show Operations (3). 
The study of the convention and trade show segment of 
event industry operations offers a unique marketing tool for 
organizations. Topics include facility selection, exhibit 
management, booth design, working with convention/trade 
show services personnel, budgeting and evaluation.  
(Prerequisite: EVNT290).   
 
EVNT399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
EVNT451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
EVNT499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
Courses in Business Administration-  
Fashion  Merchandising (FASH) 
 
FASH199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
FASH270.  Introduction to Fashion Merchandising (3). 
An introduction to the fashion industry including apparel, 
footwear, and accessories. This overview provides a 
framework for the functions of merchandising both 
domestically and globally, theories of fashion, historical 
perspectives, movement and influences, marketing and retail 
environments, 
industry 
technology, 
current 
events, 
environmental effects, specific terminology, and career 
exploration.  . 
 
FASH299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
FASH371.  Textiles (3). 
This course is a thorough study of the textile industry and its 
application to the apparel industry. Fibers, yarns, fabrics, 
prints, dyes, finishes, care, and textile legislation are studied.  
An additional emphasis includes the effects of the industry 
on the natural environment, sustainability, and life-cycle 
management. (Prerequisite: FASH270).   
 
FASH372.  Visual Merchandising & Fashion 
Promotion (3). 
This interactive approach to visual merchandising includes 
the study of display and their application to retail.  
Promotional topics include forms of advertising, social 
media, special events and their application specific to the 
fashion industry. (Prerequisites: MKTG230 
 and  FASH270).   
 
FASH373.  Product Development & Assortment  
Planning (3). 
In this course students conduct an in-depth study of 
merchandising and marketing including line and product 
development, levels of quality, and costing and sourcing of 
materials. Assortment planning, control and supply chain 
management are articulated through the use of industry 
technology. Industry terminology is further developed. 
(Prerequisites: MKTG230 and FASH270).   
 
FASH374.  Evolution of Fashion (3). 
A survey of the evolution of apparel and accessories from 
the Egyptian period to current fashion.  Stresses the social 
economical, and political factors which have influenced 
fashion as well as noting, construction, design methods, and 
terminology.  (Prerequisite: FASH270).   
 
FASH399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
 
FASH451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
FASH499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Business Administration-  
Finance (FIN) 
 
FIN110.  Basic Financial Literacy (3).  
Fundamental knowledge, strategies, techniques for  
personal saving, debt management and avoidance, taxation, 
consumer awareness, acquisition of insurance, purchase of 
real estate, investing and retirement planning, which can all 
be immediately implemented.  Open to freshmen.  
(Prerequisite: MATH101 or Math Placement exam; 
MATH101 may be taken as a co-requisite).   
 
FIN199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
FIN299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
FIN310.  Managerial Finance (3).  
The interpretation and utilization of financial information as 
used by corporate managers in the decision-making process. 
Coverage includes financial statement analysis, capital 
structure of corporations, debt and equity instruments, 
current asset management, operation and capital budgeting, 
time-value applications and financial forecasting methods. 
(Prerequisite: ACCT204). Fall,    
 
FIN311.  Investments & Security Analysis (3). 
Course Descriptions 
 
224 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Introduction to the major security exchange markets and 
related regulatory agencies, techniques for valuation of 
equity securities, bond investments and financial statement 
analysis Personal financial planning through portfolio 
development and analysis and industry and market research 
(Prerequisite: FIN310) Offered as needed.   
 
FIN314.  International Financial Management (3). 
Corporations that operate in an international environment 
face significant financial challenges This course studies 
how to manage these challenges. Topics include exchange 
rate risks, hedging, foreign operation cost of capital, 
sovereign risks, capital budgeting and international taxation. 
(Prerequisite: FIN310) Offered as needed.   
 
FIN399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
FIN410.  Advanced Managerial Finance (3). 
Advanced study of major decision-making areas of 
managerial finance, including selected topics in financial 
theory and its practical application. These include leasing, 
mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures, corporate 
reorganizations, financial planning, cost of capital, capital 
structure and business valuation issues (Prerequisite: 
FIN310) Offered as needed.   
 
FIN413.  Entrepreneurial Finance (3).  
This course studies how entrepreneurs obtain and use 
financial resources. It focuses upon the integration of 
financial matters into the overall business plan for the 
venture; identification of required resources to launch a 
venture; detailed financial analysis supporting the business 
plan; business valuation issues; investor and financial 
institution relations. (Prerequisite: FIN310).   
 
FIN451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
FIN499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
Courses in Geology (GEOL) 
 
GEOL101.  Physical Geology (4) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
An introduction to the Earth: its physical characteristics and 
processes.  Topics include Earth’s characteristics, rocks and 
minerals, subsurface and surficial Earth processes, natural 
resources, and the interaction of humans and Earth.  
Laboratory required.  GEOL101 or GEOL107 may be 
completed for credit, not both.  Fall,   
 
GEOL101L.  Physical Geology  
Laboratory exercises and experiments designed to illustrate 
principles discussed in GEOL101. (Co-requisite: 
GEOL101) Fall, Spring   
 
GEOL102.  Historical Geology (4) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE). 
An introduction to Earth’s history, as recorded in the rock 
and fossil record.  Topics include the origin of the Earth, the 
major events in the physical development of Earth through 
time, the origin of life, and the development of life through 
time.  Laboratory required.  
 
GEOL107.  Geology of National Parks (4) (NATURAL  
SCIENCE). 
Introduction to Earth’s physical characteristics and 
processes at American’s National Parks.  Major topics 
include: rocks and minerals, geological formations, volcanic 
and geothermal areas, surface and ground water, glacial 
features, mountain building, and human interaction.  
Laboratory required.  GEOL101 or GEOL107 may be 
completed for credit, not both.   
 
GEOL108.  Natural Disasters (4) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE). 
An examination of the causes, effects, and options available 
to mitigate natural disasters, such as earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions, landslides, subsidence, coastal erosion, flooding, 
severe weather, and wildfires. Three lectures, one 2-hour 
laboratory per week.  Fall. 
 
GEOL199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
GEOL299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
GEOL301.  Mineralogy (4).  
Crystallography, atomic structure and bonding, phase 
equilibria and crystal chemistry, and the megascopic   
identification and descriptive mineralogy of nonsilicate and 
silicate minerals. Two lectures, one 3-hour laboratory  per  
week.  (Prerequisites:  CHEM 105 and CHEM117). Fall of 
even years. 
 
GEOL302.  Igneous & Metamorphic Petrology (4).  
An introduction to the physical and chemical properties 
related to the formation of igneous and metamorphic rocks 
in different tectonic regimes. Laboratory study utilizes hand 
specimens and thin section analysis to interpret the origin of 
rocks. Two lectures, one 3-hour laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite:  GEOL301). Spring of odd years. 
 
GEOL307.  Structural Geology (4).  
The behavior of rocks under various kinds of force, with 
analysis of resulting structural features, including folds, 
Course Descriptions 
 
225 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
joints and faults, and the nature of the forces that produced 
them. These concepts are applied to understanding the basic 
structural and tectonic framework of North America. Two 
lectures, one 3-hour laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: 
GEOL101 or GEOL107). Spring of even years. 
 
GEOL314.  Sedimentology & Stratigraphy (4) 
The use of sedimentary rocks and sequences to interpret 
depositional environments and evaluate the evolution of 
sedimentary basins.  Topics include sedimentary petrology 
and petrography, sedimentary processes and environments, 
sedimentary 
structures, 
lithostratigraphy, 
and 
biostratigraphy.  A field trip is required.  Two hours lecture; 
three hours lab.  (Prerequisites: GEOL101 or GEOL107). 
Spring of odd years. 
 
GEOL316.  Paleontology (4) 
Fossils: 
their 
geologic 
occurrence, 
identification, 
relationship to modern organisms, and usage in interpreting 
the age of geologic units and paleoenvironments.  Topics 
include paleontological and evolutionary principles and 
major invertebrate taxa.  A field trip is required.  Two hours 
lecture; three hours lab. (Prerequisites: GEOL101 or 
GEOL107 and GEOL102). Fall of odd years. 
 
GEOL318.  Field & Laboratory Methods (4).   
An introduction to geological field and laboratory 
techniques and the fundamentals of collection and 
interpretation of geologic data in field and laboratory 
settings.  Topics include field instruments, aerial 
photography, maps, stratigraphic columns, provenance, 
analytical equipment, and geochemistry.  Field trip required.  
(Prerequisites: GEOL307 and GEOL314). Fall of even 
years. 
 
GEOL319.  Plate Tectonics (4). 
A global study of plate tectonics as a unifying solid-earth 
theory. Includes scientific development, geophysical 
evidence and application of plate tectonic processes to 
explain tectonic evolution of the Earth. Two lectures, one 3-
hour laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: GEOL101 or 
GEOL107). Fall of even years. 
 
GEOL320.  US Geology Field Experience (1).   
Students will research, give an oral presentation, and write 
an abstract on a specific geologic location in the US.  
Abstracts will be compiled as a field guide for a required 
field trip to these locations over Spring Break.  May be 
repeated one time for credit Offered as needed. 
 
GEOL321.  Contaminated Soil & Groundwater: 
Assessment & Remediation (4). 
Principles of contaminant behavior in soil and groundwater 
systems and the application of assessment and remedial 
techniques to address environmental problems. Application 
of course and laboratory content in term-long site 
assessment-remediation project. (Prerequisite: ESS205). 
Spring of even years. 
 
GEOL322.  Petroleum Geology (3). 
Lecture and laboratory exercises concerning the origin, 
migration, and accumulation of oil and natural gas in the 
Earth’s crust and the techniques for surface, subsurface, and 
geophysical exploration of petroleum resources. Two 
lectures, one 2-hour laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: 
GEOL307 or GEOL318). Offered as needed. 
 
GEOL399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
GEOL403.  Capstone: Senior Research (2). 
Independent library research on a geologic topic approved 
by the department.  Requires the preparation of a well-
researched paper, abstract, and presentation under the 
supervision of a Geology Department faculty member.  
(Prerequisite: GEOL307 or GEOL314).  Fall. 
 
GEOL451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
A program of independent study supervised by a 
departmental faculty member. The work may be theoretical, 
experimental or a field problem. May be repeated. 
(Prerequisite: departmental permission). 
 
GEOL499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Business Administration- 
Health Care Administration (HCA) 
 
HCA100.  The History of Public Health (3). 
The role of public health and governance has fundamentally 
shaped human societies  In this course, students will learn 
the role of the state in ensuring favorable public health 
outcomes  Students will also learn the importance of public 
health, understand how it provided, and learn how it is 
practiced  The course is intended to introduce students to 
the field of public health; it is intended to be broadly 
accessible to all students and provide a practical 
understanding of the field. 
 
HCA161.  Introduction to Emergency and Disaster 
Management (3). 
This course will provide students with an introduction to 
emergency and disaster management and the theories and 
legal frameworks that drive the field.  Students will explore 
the historical context and evolving factors that impact 
Course Descriptions 
 
226 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
emergency and disaster management practices.  This course 
will additionally examine various types of hazards and their 
impact on society.  Most vitally, students will learn 
fundamental leadership and management skills. 
 
HCA199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
HCA200.  Health Economics (3). 
Health Economics is the application of economics to health 
care in support of the public good.  By learning to use 
various economic theories, student will learn how available 
resources can be used to help improve the quality of 
healthcare outcomes.  Students will also learn various 
techniques of economic analysis and understand how 
healthcare organizations attach a monetary value to 
particular health states.  Finally, students will be introduced 
to ecometrics as is applies to public health.  (Prerequisites: 
MATH115 and ECON202). 
 
HCA201.  Biostatistics (3). 
The course represents an introduction to the field of 
biostatistics and provides a survey of data and data types.  
Specific topics include tools for describing central tendency 
and variability in data, methods for performing inference on 
population means and proportions via sample data, 
statistical hypothesis testing and its application to group 
comparisons, issues of power and sample size in study 
designs, and random sample studies and other study types.  
Emphasis is on using R software.  (Prerequisites: MATH115 
and BIOL101 or BIOL103).  
 
HCA262.  Socio-Economic Dimensions of Disasters (3). 
This course focuses on the ways in which socio-economic 
features impact disaster planning, response and recovery.  
Students will learn how to integrate socio-economic 
concepts into the disaster planning process with the goal of 
maximizing individual and community resilience.  By the 
end of this course, students will be able to ensure that 
strategies take into account the socio-economic conditions 
of the communities they serve and protect the vulnerable 
populations within.  (Prerequisite: SOC104). 
 
HCA281.  Introduction to Health Care in the U.S. (3). 
This course introduces current methods of delivering health 
care.  Topics include 1) medical service types and factors 
affecting need, access, and use, 2) financing health care, 3) 
factors affecting supply and distribution of health 
professionals/facilities 4) factors relating to cost and quality, 
and 5) patients as consumers of health care.   
 
HCA282.  Health Clinic Operations & Observation (1). 
Course includes concepts relevant for a clinical practice 
such as patient experience, revenue cycle, HIPAA, 
insurance, HER, risk, safety, regulatory standards, and 
testing  Course also offers students a medical clinical 
observation experience Open to freshmen.   
 
HCA287.  Health Education and Communication (3). 
This course will focus on using health education to influence 
and inform health decisions for individuals, communities 
and populations.  Content will also emphasize various 
communication strategies used to share health information, 
increase health literacy, and engage a call to action using 
models, theories and intervention strategies show to be 
effective to promote changes in attitude and behaviors in 
targeted situations.  (Prerequisite: HCA281). 
 
HCA290.  Health Services (3). 
This content will include the way healthcare is provided; the 
history of healthcare in high, middle and low income 
countries; and the evolution, structure, and function of 
healthcare services; both domestically and abroad.  Students 
will strive to improve the skills needed to evaluate the 
strengths and weaknesses of particular systems and policies, 
while examining their ideal version of a health services as it 
pertains to current world events. 
 
HCA299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
HCA300.  Epidemiology (3). 
Epidemiology is the branch of medicine that deals with the 
incidence, distribution, and control of a disease.  In this 
course, students will learn and apply key concepts of 
epidemiology to multiple domains of public health.  
Students will learn how to use epidemiology to better 
understand, characterize, and promote health at a population 
level.  (Prerequisite: HCA100 or HCA385). 
 
HCA301.  Health Economics (3). 
Health economics is the application of economics to health 
care in support of public good. Through the use of various 
economics theories, students will assess available resources, 
equate 
quality 
metrics, 
analyze 
how 
healthcare 
organizations attach a money value to particular health 
status, and investigate the effectiveness of health policy 
outcomes through an economic lens. (Prerequisite:  
ECON302) 
 
HCA363.  Emergency and Disaster Management 
Planning (3). 
Emergency 
and 
Disaster 
Management 
Planning 
dramatically 
enhances 
community 
resilience 
and 
sustainability by reducing the risks from natural and man-
made hazards.  This course explores the theories and 
concepts of emergency and disaster management planning 
with special emphasis on risk and vulnerability assessments 
Course Descriptions 
 
227 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
for hazard mitigation planning.  Students will master key 
strategies and concepts vital to hazard mitigation.  
(Prerequisite: HCA161). 
 
HCA381.  Financing Health Care (3). 
This course examines the current systems of financing 
health care, the factors affecting them, and how they drive 
transformational change.  It explores and analyzes pay-for-
performance models, financial risk and sustainability, and 
governmental and private party payer management in a 
hyper-competitive health care environment. (Prerequisite: 
HCA281).   
 
HCA383.  Health Care Outcomes & Quality (3). 
Course will address the manager’s role and approaches to 
quality improvement in both patient care and management 
of services in healthcare organizations.  Topics include: 
fundamentals of quality management, system thinking and 
decision making, improvement theories, provider safety, 
data collection, statistical tools, medical errors and 
reporting, 
public 
perceptions, 
and 
organizational 
accountability. (Prerequisite: HCA281).   
 
HCA384.  Health Care Law,  Regulation, & Policy  
Setting (3). 
Introduces legal context of U.S. health care delivery, 
presenting 
legal/regulatory 
framework, 
models 
of 
governance, and licensing/regulation for providers.  The 
conflict between provider duty and patient rights, and new 
legal issues presented by expanded sharing/analysis of 
patient data and risk-based reimbursement models are 
explored. (Prerequisite: HCA281).   
 
HCA385.  Health & Society: Introduction To Public  
Health (3). 
Course introduces a population-based perspective on health 
and health care management. Students will consider costs 
and economic and social determinants of health as they 
affect health promotion and patient behavior, access to/use 
of delivery systems, insured vs. uncompensated care, food 
safety & nutrition, and care for the aged. (Prerequisite: 
HCA281).   
 
HCA386.  Health Care Management Practicum I (3). 
This course provides exposure to health care management 
experiences, aiming to develop job-related skills through 
contact with industry professionals.  Site and task approval 
is required by the faculty in order to meet course 
objectives. (Prerequisite: 9 credit hours of HCA courses or 
permission of instructor).   
 
 
 
HCA399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
HCA400.  Public Health Studies I: Current Topics and 
Politics (3). 
This course allows students to evaluate the health impact of 
political decisions.  Students will explore current topics in 
public health (e.g. HIV/AIDS, the obesity epidemic) and 
look at the impact of US politics on global Public health, 
especially in developing nations.  Emphasis is on the 
conflict between data and political will that drives Public 
Health policy decision making.  The course outcome is a 
project to plan a Health Impact Assessment of a 
current/proposed federal/state policy.  (Prerequisite: 
HCA300 or HCA385). 
 
HCA401.  Public Health Studies II: Demographics, 
Geospatial Mapping, and Qualitative Research (3). 
This course provides students with a variety of tools for 
understanding the impact that disease other Public Health 
concerns may have on a population.  Students will learn 
how to design effective surveys, analyze geographic data 
(including required participation in a mapathon), and use 
qualitative information with the ultimate goal of gaining a 
better understanding of how events may affect the health of 
a particular population.  (Prerequisites: SOC385 and 
HCA400). 
 
HCA451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business department). 
 
HCA464.  Global Health and Crisis Management (3). 
This course examines the growing threat and potential 
consequences of disasters by examining the complexities 
of public health and humanitarian crises and studying 
emerging health security threats.  Students will explore a 
variety of health disasters as well as their consequences, 
learning to analyze issues from local, regional and global 
perspectives.  Particular attention will be paid to the roles 
of agencies, systems and practitioners in preparedness, 
response, and recovery.  (Prerequisite: HCA100, HCA161 
or HCA385). 
 
HCA465.  Post Disaster Resilience and Recovery (3). 
This course will examine the current state of disaster 
resilience and recovery.  Students will analyze the 
consistent patterns of problems surrounding equity, social 
environmental justice in terms of access to assistance and 
resources.  They will also learn how conflicting priorities 
and issues of power and influence affect community 
recovery difficulties.  Most critically, students will learn 
potential strategies to overcome these issues in the disaster 
recovery process.  (Prerequisite: HCA262) 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
228 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
HCA480.  Health Care Transformation (3). 
Concepts associated with change management, emotional 
intelligence, knowledge management, and a heightened 
patient experience will be considered as students explore 
new ways to lead in a transforming health care industry.  
(Prerequisite: 6 credit hours of HCA courses).   
 
HCA486.  Health Care Management Practicum II (3). 
This is an experiential learning course built around problem 
solving projects within health care organizations.  Students 
will use research and analysis techniques to evaluate 
situations in order to propose alternative actions or 
outcomes. 
 
(Prerequisite: 
HCA386 
or 
Instructor 
Permission).   
 
HCA499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in History (HIST) 
 
HIST105.  U.S. History to 1876 (3) (HUMANITIES). 
An introduction to the history and culture of the U.S. from 
1600 to 1876, including colonization, the formation of the 
American Republic, race and gender relations, social 
reform, industrialization, foreign relations, the Civil War 
and Reconstruction. 
 
HIST106.  U.S. History since 1865 (3) (HUMANITIES). 
An introduction to the history and culture of America from 
1865 to the present, including Reconstruction, urbanization, 
social reform, World Wars I and II, the great Depression, 
Cold War, Vietnam, and race and gender relations. 
 
 
HIST123.  Global History I (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Topics in global history between 1700 BCE to about 1700 
CE: the invention of writing, ancient empires in comparison, 
the spread of world religions, trade and cultural interactions. 
 
HIST124.  Global History II (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Interactions among societies in the modern age: the spread 
of European power across the globe, colonization, 
revolution, modernization, and global warfare. 
 
HIST130.  Chinese History I (3) (HUMANITIES,  
NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to the history and culture of China from its 
beginnings through the Tang Dynasty, including highlights 
of philosophy, literature, religion, science and technology, 
political, economic and social life. Fall. 
 
HIST131.  Chinese History II (3) (HUMANITIES,  
NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to the history and culture of China from the 
Song Dynasty to the present, including highlights of 
philosophy, literature, religion, science and technology, 
political, economic and social life.  
 
HIST132.  Japanese History I (3) (HUMANITIES, 
NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to the history and culture of Japan from its 
beginnings to 1600, including highlights of philosophy, 
literature, religion, science and technology, political, 
economic and social life. Fall. 
 
HIST133.  Japanese History II (3) (HUMANITIES, 
NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to the history and culture of Japan from 
1600 to the present, including highlights of philosophy, 
literature, religion, science and technology, political, 
economic and social life.  
 
HIST199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
HIST205.  The Novel as History (1).  
A study of a particular novel as it relates to the historical 
events in which it is set. The novel studied will change 
regularly. (May be repeated for a total of three semester 
hours). Fall,  
 
HIST213.  Women & Gender in the Cold War (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
An examination of how the Cold War influenced women’s 
everyday lives and its impact on notions of gender difference 
and ideas about sexuality in the USSR, Europe, and the 
USA. 
 
 
HIST214.  Gender and Sexuality in U.S. History(3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Examines how gender and sexuality have informed critical 
events, movements, and personal identities in U.S. history.  
Topics addressed include reproductive politics and changing 
gender norms, feminist movements, and the fights for LGBT 
rights. 
 
HIST221.  History of Japanese Women (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN).  
Topics in the history of Japanese women and gender 
including family life, culture, sexuality, politics, work, and 
education. Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST239.  Cultural History of Japan (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN).  
Cultural history of Japan through the early modern and 
modern periods  Various forms of popular culture, 
 including drama, painting, literature, cartoons, and film, will 
be used to investigate social and political developments in 
Japan Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST240.  Experiential Museology (3). 
Students will read about issues in Museum Studies and then 
create an exhibit at the Lenawee County Historical Museum. 
Offered occasionally.  
 
HIST241.  History of Slavery in the United States (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
American slavery from 1619 to the end of the Civil War.  
Emphasis on the central role of slavery in the development 
of American capitalism, westward expansion, sectional 
disputes, foreign affairs, as well as slaves’ resistance and 
anti-slavery activism.  Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST242.  The Civil Rights Movement (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
The history of the black freedom struggle from the Civil 
War era to “Black Lives Matter” campaign.  Induces a 
semester-long project on a local civil rights campaign in 
the Jim Crow North.  Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST245.  Reacting to the Past (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Students will play two complementary Reacting to the Past 
games and then conclude by comparing their common 
themes. A minimum of 15 pages of graded writing will be 
assigned. 
 
HIST246.  Refugees in Modern History (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Refugees in the 20th-21st centuries, examining case studies 
from various parts of the world.  Focus on both how refugees 
are defined and described by others, and how they express 
their own experiences and perspectives.  Includes service 
learning.  Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST250.  The History of American Capitalism (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Examines the various stages and practices of capitalism in 
United States history from the American Revolution to the 
present.  Open to first-year students. 
 
HIST285.  Medieval China (3) (NON-WESTERN). 
A study of the major changes in Chinese civilization that  
took place between 750 and 1500.  Most of these 
developments resulted in what we now think of as traditional 
Chinese culture. 
 
HIST286.  Introductory Topics in History (1-3). 
Introductory topics in history covers historical topics at a 
sophomore level rather than junior level or higher. Examples 
of topics include: Women in American Popular Culture, 
Japanese History Through Monsters. Open to first-year 
students. 
 
HIST295.  Historical Theories & Methods (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
 An introduction to historiography and historical methods 
for history majors and minors.  Taught as a Writing Intensive 
course. (Prerequisite: one previous HIST course). Fall, 
 
 
HIST299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
HIST301.  Topics in  History (3).  
In-depth study of topics in various fields and periods of 
history. Topics may include History of Medicine and the 
French Revolution. (Prerequisite: HIST295). Fall,  
 
HIST302.  Studies in Eastern Religion (3) 
(NON-WESTERN). 
Intensive study of the history of one of the cultures or 
religious traditions of Asia. This course is usually team-
taught and  cross-listed  as  RELG302.  (Prerequisite:  
HIST295).  
 
HIST303.  Fortification to Reformation: The History of  
York, England to the 15th Century (6). 
A five-week interdisciplinary course centered on York 
Minster. Readings/lectures cover Roman York, York and 
Northumbria, 
Anglo-Saxon 
York, 
Viking/Anglo 
Scandinavian York, Norman York, Late Medieval York, 
Reformation York, and beyond. Includes response papers, a 
10-page research project, a service learning experience with 
a reflection journal, and excursions to significant sites. May 
not be repeated for credit. (Prerequisite: Study Abroad 
Application Process). May, Summer. 
HIST305.  History of the Soviet Union (3).  
Rise and fall of the Soviet Union. Topics include 
revolutions, wars, economic and cultural transformation, 
Stalinism, reform, dissent. (Prerequisite: HIST295 or 
permission of instructor).  
 
HIST321.  Perspectives on Nazi Germany (3). 
An advanced history course examining Nazi Germany.  An 
emphasis on historiographical debates and theoretical 
perspectives. (Prerequisite: HIST295 or permission of 
instructor).  
 
HIST350.  History of Chinese Philosophy (3) 
(NON-WESTERN).  
Chinese philosophy is one of the great streams of 
philosophy: Indian, Chinese and Western (European and 
Islamic). The three dominant systems of ideas and values in 
Course Descriptions 
 
230 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Chinese 
philosophy 
(Confucianism, 
Daoism, 
and 
Buddhism) will be examined in terms of Chinese values and 
in comparison with Western philosophy. (Prerequisite: 
HIST295 or permission of instructor). Fall. 
 
HIST355.  History & Memory of the  Atomic Bombings  
(3) (NON-WESTERN).  
Readings and discussions of the development, use, and 
legacy of the first atomic bombs. Particular attention paid to 
comparing the social, cultural and political impact in Japan 
and the U.S. (Prerequisite: HIST295 or permission of 
instructor).  
 
HIST361.  The “American Century” (3). 
An examination of the postwar American response to the 
prospect of living in an uncertain world, including political 
and cultural perspectives.  Focuses on historiographical 
debates on the post-war period. (Prerequisite: HIST295 or 
permission of instructor). 
 
HIST363.  Topics in American Social History (3). 
Examines the forces that shaped the lives of average 
Americans during various decades. Includes such topics as 
sexuality, family, popular culture and labor. (Prerequisite: 
HIST295 or permission of instructor). 
 
HIST399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
HIST408.  Senior Research Preparation (3).  
Each student will produce and defend a senior theses 
prospectus, and will produce an exhaustive annotated 
bibliography to support senior research. (Prerequisite: 
HIST295).  Fall. 
 
HIST409.  Senior Research Capstone (3).  
Research seminar on selected problems in American, Asian, 
European or Comparative History. Required of history 
majors. (Prerequisite: HIST408).   
 
HIST451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Individual work under faculty supervision, involving 
readings, reports and research.  
 
HIST499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in the Honors Program (HONR) 
 
HONR101.  Honors Colloquium (1).  
Combines academic and experiential learning and 
emphasizes academic excellence and respect for human 
dignity. The theme of the class varies, but students are 
required to read, write, and take part in experiential learning 
through a trip to Chicago or through a service learning 
project in Adrian or elsewhere. (Prerequisite: admission to 
Honors Program. May be taken up to eight times for credit). 
Fall,  
 
HONR301.  Advanced Honors Colloquium (1).  
A seminar that draws on readings from the great books of 
western and non-western civilization as well as more recent 
work. It allows students to consider some of the big 
questions raised by the key concepts of our mission 
statement such as “What is Justice?” and “What is Truth?” 
(Prerequisite: admission to Honors Program and Junior or 
Senior standing). Fall,  
 
HONR390.  Pre-Professional Scholar (1-4).  
Student will work directly with, and be mentored by, a 
professor on research or other scholarly activity, 
culminating with a presentation. The amount of credit will 
be determined by the level of involvement of the project as 
agreed upon by the student and professor. Each credit hour 
should correspond to 40 hours of work. (Prerequisite: 
admission to Honors Program). Fall,  
 
HONR499.  Honors Option (0).  
This course will be taken with a College course in which the 
student is choosing to perform the Honors Option. The 
Honors Option courses must be at least 200 level and are 
typically chosen from within the student’s major(s). 
(Prerequisite: admission to Honors Program and Junior or 
Senior standing). Fall,  
 
For example, if a student is currently planning on taking 
MATH204, he or she must discuss the Honors Option with 
the professor, come to an agreement about the additional 
assignments to be performed, and then add HONR499 the 
semester that MATH204 is on his or her schedule. This will 
take some planning as HONR499 needs to be added in the 
same manner as all other classes within the College’s 
add/drop timeframe. Prior to adding the course, it must be 
approved by both the Honors Director and the professor of 
the course to which the Honors Option will be applied. 
 
 
Courses in Interior Design (INTD) 
 
INTD100.  Interior Design Theory (3) (ARTS). 
This studio course explores the basic theories of interior  
design related to human factors, the elements and principles 
of design, color theory, spatial relationships, programming, 
universal design and way-finding Studio will incorporate 
2-dimensional and 3-dimensional projects relative to 
practical application in interior design Fall. 
INTD130.  Freshman Studio (3). 
A studio course concentrating on drawing, sketching and 
rendering perspectives. Drawing and dimensioning 
floorplans, sections, elevations and cabinet sections. 
Beginning basic computer aided drawing programs.  
 
INTD199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
INTD200.  Sophomore Studio (3). 
A studio course giving special attention to the design 
process, research, writing, programming and presentation. 
(Prerequisites: INTD100,  INTD118, INTD130 and CCC101).  Fall. 
 
INTD221.  Interior Design Materials (3).    
Definition, 
environmental 
attributes, 
application, 
specification, and installation techniques of interior 
materials and textiles. (Prerequisite: INTD118).  
INTD222.  History of Architecture & Interiors I (3).  
The history of Architecture and Interiors from Antiquity 
through the 18th Century. Fall. 
 
INTD224.  History of Architecture & Interiors II (3).  
History of Architecture and Interiors from the 19th Century 
through today.  
 
INTD225.  AutoCAD Architectural Basics (3).  
An introduction to computer aided drafting and design or 
non-interior design majors, applicable for facilities 
management, engineering, construction management and 
landscape design. (Prerequisite: MATH101). 
 
INTD226.  AutoCad (3). 
An introduction to computer aided drafting and design 
specifically for the interior designer through the use of Auto 
CAD. (Prerequisite: INTD118).   
INTD227.  Revit (3). 
An introduction to computer aided drafting and design 
specifically for the interior designer through the use of 
Revit. (Prerequisite INTD130 and MATH101) 
 
INTD299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
INTD326.  Lighting (3). 
A studio course exploring the elements and applications of 
lighting including electrical components, measurements, 
coloration and energy efficiency for both interior and 
exterior lighting needs. (Prerequisite: INTD200) 
 
INTD323.  Residential Design I (3).  
A studio course designed around residential client needs.  
Consideration for human factors, lighting and space 
planning for general residential design with a concentration 
in Kitchen and Bath design. (Prerequisites: INTD200, 
INTD221, INTD222 and INTD224). Fall. 
 
INTD327.  Commercial Design I (3).  
A studio course designed around commercial client needs.  
Application of human factors, lighting, space planning 
programming documentation and presentation with a 
concentration 
in 
Office 
and 
Institutional 
Design. 
(Prerequisite: INTD118, INTD200 and INTD226). 
 
INTD330.  Residential Design II (3). 
A studio course designed around residential client needs.  
Consideration for human factors, lighting and space 
planning for specific residential design needs.  Areas will 
include aging in place, universal design, in-home 
entertainment spaces etc. (Prerequisites: INTD323 and 
INTD327).  
 
INTD331.  Commercial Design II (3). 
A studio course designed around commercial client needs.  
Application of human factors, lighting, space planning 
programming documentation and presentation with a 
concentration in Healthcare, Hospitality and Retail Design. 
(Prerequisites: INTD323 and INTD327).  
 
INTD350.  Special Topics in Interior Design (3). 
An interdisciplinary and collaborative class exploring a 
topic related to the built environment. Methods will include 
research, programming, and a variety of presentation styles. 
Rotating topics may include, but not limited to design needs 
of specific facilities, historic preservation and sustainability. 
Offered as needed. 
 
INTD399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
INTD401.  Senior Studio (3). 
A studio course applying research and production of a 
project that will showcase all aspects of the design needs and 
requirements for a specific facility.  Both residential and 
commercial spaces will be included. 
(Prerequisite: INTD330). Fall. 
 
INTD408.  Professional Practices for Interior  
Designers (3). 
Business practices and ethics in the field of interior design.  
(Prerequisites: INTD327 and INTD400).  
 
INTD430.  Capstone: Senior Seminar (3). 
A lecture course based on demonstrating the research, 
knowledge and programming used for the NCIDQ 
certification exam. (Prerequisites: INTD401 and INTD408). 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
232 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
INTD451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Designed for Interior Design and Pre-Architecture majors 
with a special need to study content beyond that offered in 
the normal course sequence. (Prerequisite: permission of 
department). 
 
INTD499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in International Studies (INTL) 
 
INTL101.  International Studies (3) (SOCIAL  
SCIENCE). 
Historical, cultural, political and economic relationships 
among the diverse peoples of the world. Offered as needed. 
 
INTL409.  Capstone: Research Seminar (3).  
Culminating experience for International Studies majors.  
Students will select a research topic, review the published 
literature on that topic, prepare a search proposal, conduct 
the research, and present their findings publicly. 
(Prerequisites: PSCI236, ESS104 and PSCI315 or 
ECON315).  Fall. 
 
Courses in Journalism (JRNL) 
 
JRNL151.   Publications Activities (1). 
Basics of writing, editing, and producing student 
publications, both print and online, including the student 
newspaper and literary magazine.  Cross-listed with 
ENGL151.  Open to all students.  Course may be repeated 
up to 5 times. 
 
JRNL199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
(Prerequisites: CCC101, CCC102 and JRNL238) 
 
JRNL238.  Introduction to Journalism (3). 
Basic journalism terms, history of American journalism and 
news coverage, basic tenets and ethics of journalism.  
Students will write news stories, substantiate facts, verify 
quotations, post headlines on social media, and suggest 
follow-up stories.  Fall,  Open to Freshmen. 
 
JRNL299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
(Prerequisites: CCC01, CCC102 and JRNL238) 
 
JRNL306.  Community Journalism (3). 
Practices common to local journalism and the journalist 
within the community. Students participate in a variety of 
activities geared to train them to become reporters for a 
community newspaper. Writing for print and electronic 
media with an emphasis on reporting on local government, 
education, courts, and law enforcement. (Prerequisite: 
JRNL238). Fall. 
 
JRNL308.  Women in Journalism (3). 
Students will explore the work of women journalists 
covering roughly the last century and analyze the roles and 
contributions of women to media against the backdrop of 
social change.  Open to all students.  (Prerequisites: 
CCC101, CCC102, JRNL238, or permission of instructor). 
 
 
JRNL399.   Professional Internship (1-12).  
 
JRNL415.  Focus on Journalism (3). 
Students will explore a variety of topics including various  
techniques involved in reporting on specific disciplines, 
including law, politics, ethics, sciences, business and the 
economy. (Prerequisite: JRNL238). Fall. 
 
JRNL451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
 
 
Courses in Leadership (LDRS) 
 
LDRS160.  Philosophy of Leadership (3). 
An examination of what is leadership, the forms it can take, 
and the various theories of it.  A study of leadership in the 
works of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Confucius, 
Marcus Aurelius, Martin Luther King Jr. and several other 
thinkers.  Offered as needed.  Previously listed as 
PHIL160. 
 
LDRS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
LDRS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
LDRS300.  Topics in Leadership (1-3).  
A special topic or topics in leadership, including its  
practical application and/or its relationship to other aspects 
of life. 
 
LDRS360.  Leadership & Ethics (3).  
This is a study of the various moral theories applicable to 
leadership and the examination of moral questions, moral 
dilemmas, and moral case studies in leadership.  Previously listed as PHIL360. 
 
LDRS361.  Non-Western Perspectives of Leadership  
(3) (NON-WESTERN). 
An examination of non-western views of leadership It 
includes the study of ideas on leadership from such figures 
as Sun Tzu, Lao Tzu, Confucius, Nelson Mandela, 
Mahatma Gandhi, Sitting Bull and others  Previously listed as RELG361.
LDRS362.  Directed Reading on Leadership (1).  
A close study of a text on leadership or related to the study 
of leadership Offered as needed  Previously listed as PHIL362. 
 
LDRS363.  Leaders in Context (3).  
An exploration of the movements and moments (social,  
political, and cultural context) that gave rise to leaders in 
politics, religion, business, education, the Arts, the military 
or other areas, and an evaluation of leadership in these 
areas.  Offered as needed Previously listed as PHIL363. 
 
LDRS364.  Leadership in Language (3). 
An investigation of the discourses surrounding various 
tribal, national, and religious leaders portrayed in fictional 
and non-fictional literature, and to the socio-cultural and 
ideological interests at work in various forms of narrative. 
 
LDRS365.  Leadership & Social Movements (3). 
An examination of contemporary forms of collective action 
(social movements) and the types of leadership that help 
these movements succeed or fail  An exploration of ethical 
leadership as a tool for social change in the context of 
democratic governance. 
 
LDRS366.  Bible, Poverty & Service (3). 
An examination of poverty and related issues in biblical 
literature and contemporary society  Topics include 
discourses concerning “the poor,” community coalition, 
activism, and nonprofit leadership  The course has a 
service-learning component. 
 
LDRS367.   Ethical Organization & Leadership (3).  
A study of the importance of values within an organization.  
Topics include the relationship of ethics and values to 
organizational success, creating and maintaining an ethical 
culture, incentivizing ethical behavior, and recognizing 
ethical warning signs.  Offered as needed Previously 
listed as PHIL36. 
 
LDRS368.  Feminist Models of Leadership (3). 
An exploration of how leaders may drive change in an 
organization to advance gender equality and inclusion, the 
underlying reasons that lead to incidents of sexual 
harassment.  Analysis of models of leadership and why they 
continue to marginalize and oppress women. 
 
LDRS370.  Leadership Capabilities (3). 
This course is intended to help students become more 
effective leaders.  Using strengths assessments, guest 
speakers and reflection papers, it focuses on developing 
leadership skills and the ability to make a positive difference 
in organizations, communities, and society.  
 
LDRS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
LDRS400.  Senior Thesis in Leadership (3). 
Senior research project stressing the application of research 
skills and the synthesis of knowledge in the study of 
leadership (Prerequisite: Senior standing or permission of 
department). 
 
LDRS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of  department). 
 
LDRS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Mathematics (MATH) 
 
MATH099.  Developmental Mathematics (3).  
Topics include the real number system, basic operations on 
real numbers; percent and proportion; topics from plane 
geometry and introductory algebra; exponents; operations 
on polynomials; application problems. Emphasis is on 
development of arithmetic skills and mastery of basic 
algebraic concepts. College credit only: hours do not count 
toward graduation requirements. Course must be repeated if 
grade earned is NC. (Prerequisite: Mathematics Placement 
Policy). Fall,  
 
MATH100.  Mathematics for the Liberal Arts (4) 
(MATHEMATICS BASIC EDUCATIONAL 
PROFICIENCY).  
A mathematics course for non-STEM and non-
business majors meant to motivate students’ interest in the 
beauty and relevance of mathematics from a liberal arts 
perspective. Topics covered may include, but are not 
limited to: problem solving, logic, graph theory, geometry, 
measurement, statistics, mathematics in nature, 
mathematics in art, and consumer mathematics. This 
course does not 
satisfy the prerequisite for MATH104 or MATH115. 
(Prerequisite: MATH099 or Mathematics Placement 
Policy).  Offered as needed. 
 
MATH101.  Intermediate Algebra (4)  
(MATHEMATICS BASIC EDUCATIONAL 
PROFICIENCY).  
Fundamental operations with algebraic expressions, linear 
and quadratic equations, graphs, systems of equations, 
applications and functions. (Prerequisite: MATH099 or 
Mathematics Placement Policy). Fall,  
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
234 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
MATH103.  Fundamentals of Modern Mathematics I 
(3).  
An introduction to problem solving, logic, set theory, 
number systems, operations, number theory, and algorithms. 
(Prerequisite: MATH101 or Mathematics Placement 
Policy). Fall. 
 
MATH104.  Finite Mathematics (3).  
An introduction to systems of linear equations, matrix 
theory, linear programming, set theory, logic, probability, 
and other topics. (Prerequisite: MATH101 or Mathematics 
Placement Policy). Fall, Spring 
 
MATH113.  Fundamentals of Modern  
Mathematics II (3).  
An introduction to probability and statistics, geometry, 
measurement and the use of mathematical methods, tools, 
and technology. (Prerequisite: MATH103).  
 
MATH115.  Pre-Calculus Mathematics (4).  
An introduction to the theory of functions related to 
exponential, 
logarithmic, 
rational, 
polynomial 
and 
trigonometric functions. Theorems on rational and complex 
zeros of polynomials and systems of linear equations. 
(Prerequisite: MATH101 or Mathematics Placement 
Policy). Fall,  
 
MATH135.  Calculus & Analytic Geometry I (4).  
Topics include mathematical modeling, transcendental 
functions, parametric equations and functions in parametric 
form, limits, continuity, differentiation, integration, and 
related 
applications. 
(Prerequisite: 
MATH115 
or 
Mathematics Placement Policy). Fall,  
 
MATH199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
MATH204.  Elementary Statistics (3).  
An introduction to the basic principles of statistics, 
computation 
of 
statistics, 
probability 
distributions, 
estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, and 
correlation and regression. (Prerequisite: MATH104 or 
MATH115 or Mathematics Placement Policy). Fall,  
 
MATH205.  Calculus & Analytic Geometry II (4).  
Topics include principles of integral evaluation, applications 
of the definite integral to geometry, science, and 
engineering, mathematical modeling with first-order 
differential equations, sequences, infinite series, and various 
tests 
of 
convergence. 
(Prerequisite: 
MATH135 
or 
Mathematics Placement Policy).  Fall,  
 
MATH210.  Women in Science and Mathematics (3).  
(HUMANITIES). 
A survey of women’s contributions to the sciences and 
mathematics, with emphasis placed on the eighteenth 
through twentieth centuries. (Prerequisites: CCC101, 
MATH101 and completion of the Natural Science 
Distribution). Fall of even years.  
 
MATH215.  Calculus & Analytic Geometry III (4).  
Topics include analytic geometry, polar coordinates and 
curves, three-dimensional space, vectors and vector-valued 
functions, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, and various 
topics in vector calculus. (Prerequisite: MATH205). Fall. 
 
MATH216.  Discrete Mathematics (3).  
An introduction to set theory, sequences, matrices, 
properties of integers, common techniques in proof-writing, 
combinatorics, probability, relations, functions, and other 
topics. This course is intended to prepare students for upper-
level mathematics courses. (Prerequisite: MATH205).  
 
 
MATH220.  History of Mathematics (3).   
A survey of major developments in mathematics from 
ancient through modern times, with emphasis placed on 
individuals who made significant contributions to the 
discipline.  (Prerequisites: CCC101 and MATH135).  Fall of 
odd years. 
 
MATH299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
MATH303.  Linear Algebra & Matrices (3).  
Matrices, determinants, systems of linear equations, vector 
spaces, 
linear 
transformations, 
eigenvectors 
and 
eigenvalues. (Prerequisite: MATH216). Fall. 
 
MATH304.  Theory of Probability (3).  
Descriptive statistics, probability and counting techniques, 
discrete and continuous distributions, moment generating 
functions, multivariate and conditional distributions, the 
correlation coefficient, and least squares regression.   
(Prerequisite: MATH205).  Fall. 
 
MATH305.  Differential Equations (3).  
Solutions of various types of ordinary differential equations, 
linear equations with constant coefficients, the Laplace 
Transform, systems of equations, and series solutions. 
(Prerequisite: MATH205).  
 
MATH307.  Probability for Actuaries (3). 
Actuaries and quantitative professionals deal primarily in 
probabilities. This course will cover a wide range of topics 
and introduce you to core probability concepts needed for 
actuarial and quantitative work. You will be able to apply to 
concepts of probability to real-world scenarios. This course 
Course Descriptions 
 
235 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
will also fully cover all content required by the Society of 
Actuaries P Exam and its equivalents. (Prerequisites:  
MATH215 and MATH304) 
 
MATH309.  Topics in Mathematics (1-3).  
Topics of interest to faculty and students. Sample topics 
include, but are not limited to, numerical analysis, graph 
theory, advanced discrete math, advanced multivariable 
calculus, 
partial 
differential 
equations, 
history 
of 
mathematics. May be repeated for credit if the topic is 
different. Offered as needed. 
 
MATH313.  Abstract Algebra (3).  
An introduction to the theory of groups, rings, and fields. 
(Prerequisite: MATH303).  
 
MATH314.  Theory of Mathematical Statistics (3).  
Sampling theory, point and interval estimation, order 
statistics, tests of hypothesis, nonparametric methods, 
statistical quality control, and experimental design.  
(Prerequisite:  MATH304).   
 
MATH323.  Geometry (3).  
A survey of topics in geometry including historical  topics,  
elements  of  logic,  foundations in Euclidean geometry, and 
introduction 
to 
non-Euclidean 
geometry 
using 
the 
hyperbolic model. This course emphasizes different 
methods of proof. (Prerequisite: MATH205; Co-requisite: 
MATH216).   
 
MATH324.  Numerical Analysis (3).  
An introduction to numerical analysis in finding roots of 
polynomials, polynomial approximation, finite difference 
calculus, summation calculus, and selected topics in 
computer programming. (Prerequisite: MATH205). Offered 
as needed. 
 
MATH337.  Mathematical Theory of Interest (3). 
Measurement of interest rates, basic problems in interest 
theory, basic annuities, continuous and varying annuities, 
yield rates, amortization, bonds and other securities, 
practical applications, and stochastic approaches to interest.  
More broadly, course material will cover pricing of bonds, 
mortgages, annuities, and other financial instruments.  
Return on investment, duration, convexity, and portfolio 
immunization are also covered.  (Prerequisite: MATH135). 
 
MATH399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
MATH403.  Number Theory (3).  
Divisibility, primes, congruencies, multiplicative functions, 
primitive roots, quadratic residues, quadratic reciprocity, 
and other topics. (Prerequisite: MATH303). Offered as 
needed. 
 
MATH405.  Real Analysis (3).  
Theory of functions of a real variable; sequences and series, 
limits, continuity, derivatives, the Riemann integral and 
other topics. (Prerequisites: MATH215 and MATH303). 
Fall. 
 
MATH410.  Advanced Topics in Mathematics (1-3).  
Advanced topics of interest to faculty and students. Sample 
topics include, but are not limited to, complex analysis, 
topology, operations research, advanced topics in linear 
algebra, abstract algebra, geometry and statistics. May be 
repeated for credit if the topic is different. Offered as 
needed. 
 
MATH417.  Actuarial Science and Risk Management 
with R (3). 
Team-based problem solving in actuarial science and risk 
management.  Students will learn the fundamentals of the R 
programming language, RStudio and R Markdown, and use 
these tools to complete a range of projects.  Projects vary, 
but may include bond and loan amortization, analysis of the 
efficient frontier and the capital asset pricing method, 
insurance liability and estimates of expected loss.  This 
course culminates in a capstone project.  (Prerequisites: 
MATH215 and MATH357). 
 
MATH420.  Capstone:  Mathematics (2).   
Students will deepen their understanding of the content of 
core undergraduate mathematics courses while investigating 
the relevance of mathematics to other fields of study.  
Among those instruments used to assess student 
performance will be a written report. An oral presentation is 
also required. (Prerequisite: MATH313).   
 
MATH451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Advanced topics for students planning further study in 
mathematics. (Prerequisites: B average in mathematics and 
permission of department chair). 
 
 
 
MATH499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Business Administration- Management 
(MGMT) 
 
MGMT199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
MGMT243.  Organizational Behavior (3).  
Course Descriptions 
 
236 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
This course provides a comprehensive analysis of individual 
and group behavior in organizations.  Its purpose is to 
provide an understanding of how organizations can be 
managed more effectively and at the same time enhance the 
quality of employees work life. (Prerequisite: BUS101). 
Open to freshmen. Fall,    
 
MGMT299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
MGMT342.  Information Technology and Project  
Management (3).  
Issues of the information-age organization including the role 
of information and technology in creating and maintaining 
competitive advantage and managing projects.    Explores 
the roles of the internet in creating new business models, 
including e-commerce, business-to-business computing and 
enterprise systems. (Prerequisites:  MGMT243 and 
CIS140). Fall.   
 
MGMT343.  Production and Operations  
Management (3).  
Quantitative and qualitative dimensions of problem solving 
and decision making for production and operations 
managers. Coverage includes planning, organizing and 
controlling conversion systems in both manufacturing and 
non-manufacturing industries.  (Prerequisites: BUS101, 
MATH104 or higher Math completed). Fall.   
 
MGMT344.  Human Resource Management (3).  
Qualitative and quantitative methods of improving 
productivity and the quality of work life. Topics include 
government regulations influencing the work environment; 
human resource planning; recruitment, selection and 
development of the work force; motivation of individuals 
and groups; performance appraisal methods; and the nature 
and development of compensation programs. (Prerequisite: 
MGMT243). Fall,    
 
MGMT347.  Management of Multinational Firms (3).  
The development and functioning of the multinational firm, 
emphasizing and explaining the differences from the purely 
domestic enterprise. Topics include global strategic 
planning; international production, supply, personnel and 
contract negotiation; firm-host government relations; 
international trade and foreign investment; and foreign 
investment in the U.S. (Prerequisite: MGMT243). Fall, 
alternate years.   
 
MGMT348.  Industrial/Organizational Psychology (3).  
See PSYC348 for course description.   
 
MGMT351.   Supply Chain Management I: Forecasting 
& Logistics (3). 
This course provides a broad overview of the planning and 
execution of customer demand.  It is divided into two parts: 
forecasting and logistics.  (Prerequisite: MGMT343). 
 
MGMT352.   Supply Chain Management II: Sourcing & 
Operations (3). 
This course provides an overview of coursing and 
operations.  Course covers: supplier selection, supplier 
segmentation, make vs. buy decisions and supplier 
relationships.  Students will learn the Lean Inventory 
methodology 
and 
the 
Six 
Sigma 
methodology.  
(Prerequisite: MGMT351). 
 
MGMT353.  Supply Chain Management III: Simulation 
(3). 
This course encapsulates all of the skills that students have 
learned in Supply Chain Management I and II, and asks 
students to apply these skills toward solving full scale 
supply chain challenges.  (Prerequisites: MGMT351and 
MGMT352). 
 
MGMT354.   Supply Chain Management Technologies 
(3). 
This course covers relevant supply chain technologies and 
systems, specifically focusing on ways to create efficient 
and effective outcomes. Students will survey the systems 
that enable the supply chain in best-in-class supply chain 
organizations in order to understand how information flows 
throughout the supply chain. (Prerequisite:  MGMT352) 
 
MGMT355.  Supply Chain in Action (3). 
Everything from preparing for a concert to getting needs 
COVID supplies into the community relies on the existence 
of effective supply chains. In this course, you’ll learn about 
the application of supply chain systems to real-world 
functions. Students will focus on strategies and application 
of supply chains through emphasis on how it intersects with 
business as well as national and global interests. 
(Prerequisite: MGMT352) 
 
MGMT360.   Employment and Labor Law (3). 
An overview of laws and regulations that determine the 
rights and obligations of employees and employers.  Topics 
include the mature of the employment relationship and 
common law principles, prohibitions against discrimination, 
wage and hour law, etc.  (Prerequisites: BUS305 and 
MGMT344). 
 
 
MGMT361.   Total Compensation Management (3). 
A study of the total compensation management function in 
business, as evidenced through the human resources 
framework.  Major areas of activity will include job analysis, 
Course Descriptions 
 
237 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
job evaluation, establishing pay structures and benefits.  
(Prerequisite: MGMT344). 
 
MGMT362.   Human Resource Risk Management (3). 
Examines the scope and roles of HR in the occupational 
health and safety arena, the fundamental components of 
comprehensive programs, and the interplay between these 
considerations and how important HR professionals are in 
their success.  (Prerequisite: MGMT344). 
 
MGMT370.  Introduction to Project Management (3). 
This 
course 
introduces 
students 
to 
vital 
project- 
management concepts, including foundational principles 
and the life-cycle of projects.  Students will also develop an 
understanding of how individual projects, and the larger 
programs the makeup, fit within the context of an 
organization.  Course covers two basic approaches to project 
management, waterfall (predictive) and agile.  (Prerequisite: 
BUS101). 
 
MGMT371.  Project Planning (3). 
Course provides students with a deep understanding of the 
rudiments of project planning: scope, time, cost, resources, 
risk, and quality.  Students will also learn how to leverage 
resources, and how managing risk, quality, and stakeholder 
expectations are critical to the definition of project success.  
(Prerequisite: MGMT370). 
 
MGMT372.  Project Execution, Monitoring & Control,  
Implementation & Closure (3). 
This course covers project execution, monitoring/control, 
implementation/handover, DevOps, and project closure.  
This course is intended to finalize a student’s preparation for 
their Project Management Practicum.  (Prerequisite: 
MGMT371). 
 
MGMT399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
MGMT443.  Supply Chain Management (3).  
Examines the activities necessary for effective supply chain 
management. Topics include design strategy, forecasting, 
sourcing strategy, logistics, global issues, performance 
measurement 
and 
Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning. 
(Prerequisite: MGMT342 or MGMT343).  
 
MGMT451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
 
 
MGMT460.   Training and Development (3). 
An advanced course designed to develop knowledge and 
skill in the design, development, delivery and evaluation of 
organizational and job-related training and performance 
improvement programs.  (Prerequisite: MGMT344).  
 
MGMT470.  Advanced Project Management 
Practicum (3). 
This course is intended as a culmination of a student’s work 
in the Project Management major.  Students will work in 
groups to manage a simulated project from scope to 
completion.  This course will also provide students with an 
overview of the product life-cycle, governance, and other 
topics to help contextualize project work.  (Prerequisite: 
MGMT372). 
 
MGMT499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Military Science  (MIL) 
 
MIL101.  Introduction to the Army (1) 
Introduces students to issues and competencies that are  
central to a commissioned officer's responsibilities. 
Establishes a framework for understanding leadership, 
officership, Army values, physical fitness and time 
management. Enrollment in this course includes enrollment 
in a required Leadership Lab. 
 
MIL102. Foundations of Agile and Adaptive 
Leadership (1) 
Builds upon the basic leadership fundamentals introduced 
in MIL101 and includes lessons in goal setting, problem 
solving, critical thinking, values clarification, leadership 
and followership, and introduces techniques for improving 
listening and speaking skills. Enrollment in this course 
includes enrollment in a required Leadership Lab 
 
MIL201.  Leadership and Decision Making (2) 
Identifies successful leadership characteristics through 
observation of others and self, using experiential learning 
exercises designed to teach students how to communicate, 
how to build teams and how to plan and organize 
effectively. Enrollment in this course includes enrollment 
in a required Leadership Lab. 
 
MIL202:  Army Doctrine and Team Development (2) 
Students examine how to build successful teams, including 
methods for influencing action and achieving goals, 
effective communication techniques, values and ethics, 
problem solving and physical fitness. Enrollment in this 
course includes enrollment in a required Leadership Lab. 
 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
238 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
MIL301: Training Management and the Warfighting 
Functions (3) 
Students assess leadership abilities, plan and conduct 
individual and small unit training, and apply basic tactical 
principles and reasoning skills. Enrollment in this course 
includes enrollment in a required Leadership Lab. 
 
MIL302. Applied Leadership in Small Unit OPS (3) 
Examines the role that communications, values and ethics 
play in effective leadership. Topics include ethical decision 
making, consideration of others and Army Leadership 
Doctrine. Enrollment in this course includes enrollment in 
a required Leadership Lab. 
 
MIL401. The Army Officer (3) 
Develops student proficiency in planning and executing 
complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff and 
mentoring subordinates. Students explore the Army's 
training management system, methods of effective staff 
collaboration and developmental counseling techniques. 
 
MIL402.  Company Grade Leadership (2) 
Course includes a case study analysis of military law and 
practical exercises on establishing an ethical command 
climate. Students complete a semester-long Senior 
Leadership Project that requires them to plan, organize, 
analyze and demonstrate their leadership skills. 
 
MIL480.  United States Military History (2) 
An in-depth study of the battle and its place in American 
history, examining combat leadership and the decision 
making process at both the operational and tactical level. 
 
 
Courses in Business Administration- Marketing  
(MKTG) 
 
MKTG199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
MKTG230.  Marketing (3). 
The nature and significance of marketing, its functions and 
institutions; the market for consumer goods; consumer 
motivation and behavior; policies and practices, research, 
development, physical distribution, price and non-price 
competition; and governmental relationships to marketing 
activities. Coverage includes the commodity, functional and 
institutional approaches to the study of marketing, 
supplemented by case studies and computer problems. Fall, 
   
 
MKTG299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
MKTG331.  Marketing Research (3).  
Development of the skills necessary to specify and use 
market and buyer information in defining marketing 
problems and making marketing decisions. Applied 
marketing research problems are investigated through 
readings, case subjects and computer analysis using the 
SPSS system and an original marketing research project is 
undertaken. (Prerequisites: MKTG230 and MATH204 or 
MATH304).    
 
MKTG332.  Consumer Behavior (3).  
Theory and research related to consumer behavior, including 
such topics as the role of personality, motivational, 
perceptual, learning and attitudinal variables; family and 
cultural influences; and various decision-making models. 
(Prerequisite: MKTG230). Fall.   
 
MKTG333.  Advertising and Promotions  
Management (3).  
Provides an understanding and evaluation of the advertising 
function within the modern business environment.   Topics 
relate to the promotional mix from a manager’s point of 
view, including decisions about promotional campaign 
design, budgeting, message and media selection and 
measurement of effectiveness. Special emphasis on social 
and 
ethical 
aspects 
of 
the 
advertising 
program. 
(Prerequisites: MKTG230 and  
MKTG339).    
 
MKTG334.  Retailing (3).  
A comprehensive upper-level management view of retail 
decision making. The emphasis is on strategic, business-
level and functional processes in the retail chain system, 
applying marketing, management, finance and accounting 
principles in the retail environment. A group case analysis is 
required. (Prerequisite: MKTG230). Fall.   
 
MKTG335.  Sales Management (3).  
The role of sales management in achieving strategic and 
marketing objectives. The emphasis is on account 
management, policy, structure, forecasting, territory design, 
quota setting, recruitment and selection, training, motivation 
and 
compensation 
system 
design. 
(Prerequisite: 
MKTG230).    
 
MKTG337.  International Marketing (3).  
Methods of establishing and servicing foreign markets amid 
the complexities of differing cultural, legal and business 
environments. The emphasis is on pricing, promotion and 
channels of distribution. Coverage includes discussion of 
exporting, importing and tariff barriers. (Prerequisite: 
MKTG230).  Fall, alternate years.   
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
239 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
MKTG338.  Brand Management (3).    
The brand management course focuses on initiating, 
building and maintaining brand identity for start-ups, small 
companies and large organizations. Integrated marketing 
techniques used to build brands as well as the evolving role 
of the brand manager are covered.  A team-based practicum 
on building a brand is included. (Prerequisite: MKTG230).  
Fall,    
 
MKTG339.  Social Media Marketing (3).  
This course will provide an in-depth look at social media 
from a marketing perspective through a focus on social 
networks, social media platforms, online and mobile 
platforms as marketing tools. The role and impact of these 
venues will be studies via experiential learning activities. 
(Prerequisite: MKTG230 or permission of instructor). Fall, 
   
 
MKTG340.   Relationship-Drive Professional  
Selling (3). 
Course covers selling from prospecting through relationship 
building and will equip students with the knowledge, skills, 
and attitudes necessary to succeed in a professional selling 
position.  (Prerequisite: MKTG230). 
 
MKTG341.   Negotiation and Sales in Business (3). 
This course focuses on conducting negotiations.  Students 
will explore the dynamics of conflicts that emerge during 
negotiations, explore their own negotiating styles, and 
discuss ethical implications of negotiations.  (Prerequisite: 
MKTG230). 
 
MKTG342.   Sales Leadership (3). 
Course is designed to be a “learning laboratory” for 
exploring key sales and management concepts related to the 
sales function.  Course covers data analysis and evaluation, 
sales coaching, and decision-making for sales leaders.  
(Prerequisite: MKTG340). 
 
MKTG350.   Email Marketing (3). 
This course will teach students how to craft successful email 
marketing campaigns when targeting business or individual 
customers.  Students will also learn how to use email 
campaigns for customer engagement and activation.  
(Prerequisites: MKTG230 and BUS242). 
 
MKTG351.   Search Engine Optimization/ Search 
Engine Marketing (3). 
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) and Search Engine 
Marketing (SEM) help companies become more visible to 
customers.  This course introduces students to optimization 
and how to use these tools to drive lead generation.  
(Prerequisite: MKTG230). 
 
MKTG352.   Digital Marketing Analytics (3). 
In this course, students will learn how to analyze digital 
customer behavior data using a range of tools, and use that 
data to test marketing hypotheses and improve customer 
acquisition.  (Prerequisites: MATH104 or higher Math and 
MKTG339). 
 
MKTG353.   Viral & Organic Growth (3). 
The course is tended to teach students what drives uses to 
share content, how to build shareable content, and how to 
run contests and perform other activates that tend to lead to 
viral or organic growth.  (Prerequisite: MKTG339). 
 
MKTG399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
MKTG440.   Advanced Relationship-Driven Selling (3). 
Course focuses on the planning and research necessary to be 
a credible and compelling salesperson.  Course topics 
include pre-call preparation and research, understanding 
building and driving value, and relationship-driven account 
development.  (Prerequisite: MKTG340). 
 
MKTG451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
MKTG499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Modern Languages  
and Cultures (MLCX) 
 
Arabic (MLCA) 
 
MLCA101.  Arabic I (3) (LANGUAGE,  
NON-WESTERN).   
Introduction to the Arabic language with a focus on speaking 
and listening comprehension.  Students are introduced to 
aspects of Arabic culture and life in the Middle East and the 
U.S. (Co-requisite: MLCA101L). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCA101L.  Arabic I Lab (1) 
(LANGUAGE, NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with an emphasis on writing, media 
resources, and real-world language applications.  
(Co-requisite: MLCA101). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCA102.  Arabic II (3) (LANGUAGE,  
NON-WESTERN). 
Course Descriptions 
 
240 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Continued development of Arabic language skills at the 
novice level with a focus on speaking and listening 
comprehension. Further exploration of Arabic culture. 
(Prerequisites: MLCA101 and MLCA101L;  
Co-requisite: MLCA102L). Spring as needed. 
 
MLCA102L.  Arabic II Lab (1) 
(LANGUAGE, NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with an emphasis on writing, media 
resources, and real-world language applications.  
(Prerequisites: MLCA101 and MLCA101L; Co-requisite: 
MLCA102). Spring as needed. 
 
 
French (MLCF) 
 
MLCF101.  French I (3) (LANGUAGE).  
Development of listening, speaking, reading and writing 
skills in French. Introduction to the cultures of French-
speaking countries.  (Co-requisite: MLCF101L). Fall. 
 
MLCF101L.  French 1 Lab (1) (LANGUAGE). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. (Co-
requisite: MLCF101).  Fall. 
 
MLCF102.  French II (3) (LANGUAGE). 
Further development of listening, speaking, reading and 
writing skills in French.  Introduction to the cultures of 
French-speaking countries.  (Prerequisites: MLCF101 and 
MLCF101L or equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCF102L). 
  
 
MLCF102L.  French II Lab (1) (LANGUAGE). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications.  
(Prerequisites: MLCF101 and MLCF101L or equivalent; 
Co-requisite: MLCF102).  
 
MLCF201.  French III (3). 
Review and further development of speaking, listening, 
reading, writing skills. Readings on cultures of French-
speaking peoples and representative French-language 
literary works. (Prerequisite: MLCF102 and MLCF102L or 
equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCF201L). Fall. 
 
MLCF201L.  French III Lab (1). 
Writing, discussion, and textual-analysis laboratory to 
accompany MLCF201. (Prerequisite: MLCF102 and 
MLCF102L or equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCF201). Fall. 
 
MLCF204.  French IV (3). 
Continued development of intermediate French proficiency.  
Readings and discussions of excerpts from Francophone 
literatures. (Prerequisite: MLCF201 and MLCF201L; Co-
requisite: MLCF204L).  
 
MLCF204L.  French IV Lab (1). 
Writing, discussion, and textual-analysis laboratory to 
accompany MLCF204. Emphasis will be placed on different 
writing genres, as well as peer editing.  
(Prerequisite: MLCF201 and MLCF201L; Co-requisite: 
MLCF 204).  
 
 
German (MLCG) 
 
MLCG101.  German I (3) (LANGUAGE). 
Development of novice German proficiency in listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing skills (with an emphasis on 
speaking and listening). Introduction to the cultures of 
German-speaking countries. (Co-requisite: MLCG101L). 
Fall. 
 
MLCG101L.  Text & Discourse (1) (LANGUAGE). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with an emphasis on writing and current 
German-language media. (Co-requisite: MLCG101). Fall. 
 
MLCG102.  German II (3) (LANGUAGE). 
Continued development of novice German proficiency (with 
an emphasis on speaking and listening) and exploration of 
the cultures of German-speaking countries. (Prerequisites: 
MLCG101 & MLCG101L or equivalent; Co-requisite: 
MLCG102L).  
 
MLCG102L.  Text & Discourse (1). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with an emphasis on writing and current 
German-language media. (Prerequisites: MLCG101 & 
MLCG101L or equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCG102). 
 
 
MLCG211.  The Immigrant Experience in Germany (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN). 
Germany is one of the world’s top destinations for 
permanent migration.  The course explores issues 
surrounding immigration from native German and 
immigrant perspectives.  Intermediate grammar review and 
practice support coursework and discussions.  
(Prerequisites: MLCG102 and MLCG102L).   
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
241 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
MLCG212.  German Cinema I (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Survey of German film productions in its historical and 
social context from 1895 to 1945.  Intermediate grammar 
review and practice support coursework and discussions.  
(Prerequisites: MLCG102 and MLCG102L). 
 
MLCG213.  German Colonialism (3) 
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN). 
Survey of German colonialism from the first colonies of 
individual state to colonies of the Deutsches Reich (1871-
1918).  Focus placed on experiences of populations under 
colonialism.  Intermediate grammar review and practice 
support coursework and discussions.  (Prerequisites: 
MLCG102 and MLCG102L). 
 
MLCG214.  German Cinema II (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Survey of German film production in its historical and 
social context from 1945 to present.  Intermediate grammar 
review and practice support coursework and discussions.  
(Prerequisites: MLCS102 and MLCG102L). 
 
MLCG215.  German Music History (3)  
(HUMANITIES). 
Overview of German music in it historical context from the 
12th century to the present.  Intermediate grammar review 
and practice support coursework and discussions.  
(Prerequisites: MLCG102 and MLCG102L). 
 
MLCG216.  Amerika (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Survey of representations of the United States in the 
German imagination from the Waldseemueller Map to the 
present.  Intermediate grammar review and practice support 
coursework and discussions.  (Prerequisites: MLCG102 
and MLCG102L). 
 
MLCG331.  Nazi Propaganda (3) (HUMANITIES). 
A survey of the historical development of  Nazi propaganda 
in film, text, and other media.  Analysis will draw from 
persuasion research in psychology and linguistics.  Course 
conducted in English.  If taken for German credit, readings 
and writings in German. (Prerequisite: completion of 6 
hours of MLCG211-MLCG216 or CCC101). Alternating 
Springs. 
 
MLCG332.  Holocaust & Memory (3) (HUMANITIES). 
Examination of the Holocaust, its victims, bystanders, and 
perpetrators through the intersection of historical narrative, 
memory studies, and identity construction.  Course 
conducted in English.  If taken for German credit, readings 
and writings in German. (Prerequisite: completion of 6 
hours of MLCG211-MLCG216 or CCC101). Alternating 
Springs. 
 
MLCG351.  Professional Portfolio (3). 
Development of a substantial on-line portfolio of 
professional genres relevant to student career goals.  All 
compositions undergo the process of peer editing and 
revision.  Formal language instruction included as needed. 
(Prerequisite: completion of 6 hours of MLCG211-
MLCG216; CCC101 when taken for writing intensive 
credit). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCG361.  Conversation: Professional German (1). 
Development of conversational skills relevant to common 
workplace interactions and interviews. (Prerequisite: 
MLCG102 or equivalent). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCG362.  Conversation: Leisure & Games (1). 
Development of conversational skills related to leisure 
activities.  Also includes oral and cultural proficiency 
development 
through 
game 
playing. 
(Prerequisite: 
MLCG102 or equivalent). Spring as needed. 
 
MLCG363.  Conversation: Flora & Fauna (1). 
Development of ability to talk about common plants and 
animals.  Plant units involve campus walking tours. 
(Prerequisite: MLCG102 or equivalent). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCG364.  Conversation: The Human Body (1). 
Development of the ability to talk about the human body: its 
basic external and internal anatomy, its functions, and its 
ailments. Special attention given to body-related language 
that is used metaphorically in multiple domains. 
(Prerequisite: MLCG102 or equivalent). Spring as needed. 
 
MLCG365.  Conversation: Social Simulations (1). 
Development of conversational skills and politeness 
required in various social scenarios.  Further development of 
cultural competency for the German-speaking world. 
(Prerequisite: MLCG102 or equivalent). Fall as needed. 
 
MLCG366.  Conversation: Scientific German (1). 
Development of conversational ability in the topics of 
technology and basic chemistry (including the elements and 
common compounds). Discussion of current science and 
tech news in the German media. (Prerequisite: MLCG102 or 
equivalent). Spring as needed. 
 
Japanese (MLCJ) 
 
MLCJ101.   Japanese I (3) (LANGUAGE, 
NON-WESTERN).  
Development of listening, speaking, reading, and writing 
skills in Japanese, with an introduction to Japanese culture. 
(Co-requisite MLCJ101L). Fall. 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
242 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
MLCJ101L.  Japanese I Lab (1) (LANGUAGE,  
NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. (Co-
requisite: MLCJ101). Fall. 
MLCJ102.  Japanese II (3) (LANGUAGE,  
NON-WESTERN). 
Continued development of listening, speaking, reading, and 
writing skills in Japanese, with an introduction to Japanese 
culture. (Prerequisites: MLCJ101 and MLCJ101L; Co-
requisite: MLCJ102L).  
 
MLCJ102L.  Japanese II Lab (1) (LANGUAGE,  
NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. 
(Prerequisites: MLCJ101 and MLCJ101L; Co-requisite: 
MLCJ102).  
 
MLCJ201.  Japanese III (3) (NON-WESTERN). 
Further development of aural-oral, reading, writing, and 
cultural recognition skills in Japanese. Topical essays and 
literature selections will form the basis for written work and 
discussions. (Prerequisites: MLCJ102 and MLCJ102L; Co-
requisite: MLCJ201L). Fall. 
 
MLCJ201L.  Japanese III Lab (1) (NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. (Co-
requisite: MLCJ201). Fall. 
 
MLCJ202.  Japanese IV (3) (NON-WESTERN). 
Further development of aural-oral, reading, writing, and 
cultural recognition skill in Japanese. Topical essays and 
literature selections will form the basis for written work and 
discussions. (Prerequisites: MLCJ201 and MLCJ201L; Co-
requisite: MLCJ202L).  
 
MLCJ202L.  Japanese IV Lab (1) (NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
reinforcement 
of 
practical 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. (Co-
requisite: MLCJ202).  
 
MLCJ210.  Japanese Literature in Translation (3)  
(HUMANITIES, NON-WESTERN). 
We will read Japanese literature in English, including epic, 
novels, short stories, and manga. We investigate Japan as it 
moves from isolation to impact with the West through the 
literature that both reflects and shapes that society. We read 
“high” literature and “pop” literature, including anime, 
manga, and feature films. Offered as needed. 
 
MLCJ215.  Japanese Film (3) (HUMANITIES,  
NON-WESTERN). 
This course investigates the language and culture of Japan 
through its films.  Surveying Japanese films from a variety 
of genres, students are exposed to a non-Western version of 
a quintessentially Western art form.  No prior knowledge of 
Japanese language necessary.  
(Co-requisite: MLCJ215L).Offered as needed. 
 
MLCJ215L.  Japanese Film Lab (1) (HUMANITIES,  
NON-WESTERN). 
Intense, student-centered discussion of Japanese film, with 
an emphasis on connections to film theory, the corpus of 
Japanese films studied in class, and theories of cultural 
diversity. (Co-requisite: MLCJ215). Offered as needed. 
 
MLCJ250.   Japanese Special Topics (1-3)  
(NON-WESTERN). 
Designed particularly for non-majors, the course can be 
repeated with a different topic.  No prior knowledge of 
Japanese language necessary.  Open to freshmen. 
 
MLCJ350.   Advanced Japanese Language (3)  
(NON-WESTERN). 
Listening, reading, and speaking skills integrated with 
writing.  Emphasis is on kanji acquisition and writing in 
Japanese.  Repeatable once for credit.  (Prerequisites: 
MLCJ201 and MLCJ201L or equivalent). Offered as 
needed. 
 
 
American Sign Language (MLCH) 
 
MLCH101.  American Sign Language I (3) 
(LANGUAGE). 
Development of novice level expressive skills in American 
Sign Language with an emphasis on conversation style. (Co-
requisite: MLCH101L). Fall. 
 
 
MLCH101L.  Deaf Culture & Language Lab I (1) 
(LANGUAGE). 
Introduction to and exploration of deaf culture, the history 
of ASL in the United States, and practice in fingerspelling 
and numbering in ASL. (Co-requisite: MLCH101).  
 
MLCH102.  American Sign Language II (3) 
(LANGUAGE). 
Continued development of novice level expressive skills in 
American Sign Language with an emphasis on conversation 
Course Descriptions 
 
243 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
style. (Prerequisites: MLCH101 and MLCH101L; Co-
requisite: MLCH102L).  
 
MLCH102L.  Deaf Culture & Language Lab II (1) 
(LANGUAGE). 
Continued exploration of deaf culture, the history of ASL 
in the United States, and practice in fingerspelling and 
numbering in ASL. (Prerequisites: MLCH101 and 
MLCH101L; Co-requisite: MLCH102).  
Linguistics (MLCL) 
 
MLCL101.  Introduction to Linguistics (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE). 
Introduction to the scientific study of human language.  
Major topics include phonetics, phonology, morphology, 
syntax, and semantics.  Additional topics may include: 
cognitive linguistics, pragmatics, sociolinguistics, speech 
pathology, 
gesture, 
development, 
and 
bilingualism.  
Students may be required to participate in experiments (or 
complete an alternative assignment). Fall as needed. 
 
 
Spanish (MLCS) 
 
MLCS101.  Spanish I (3) (LANGUAGE). 
Development of novice Spanish proficiency in listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing skills.  Introduction to the 
cultures of the Spanish-speaking nations, including the 
United States. (Co-requisite: MLCS101L). Fall 
 
MLCS101L.  Spanish I Lab (1) (LANGUAGE). 
Intense, 
student-centered 
practical 
reinforcement 
of 
language skills, with emphasis on conversation, writing, 
media resources, and real-world language applications. (Co-
requisite: MLCS101; must pass both MLCS101 and 
MLCS101L to continue to MLCS102 and MLCS102L). 
Fall.  
 
MLCS102.  Spanish II (3) (LANGUAGE). 
Further development of novice Spanish proficiency in 
listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Introduction 
to the cultures of the Spanish-speaking nations, including 
the 
United 
States. 
(Prerequisites: 
MLCS101 
and 
MLCS101L; Co-requisite: MLCS102L). Fall,  
 
MLCS102L.  Spanish II Lab (1) (LANGUAGE). 
Continued practical reinforcement of language skills, with 
emphasis on conversation, writing, media resources, and 
real-world language applications. (Co-requisite: MLCS102; 
must pass both MLCS102 and MLCS102L to fulfill 
language requirement).  Fall,   
 
MLCS201.  Spanish III (3). 
Continued development of speaking, listening, reading and 
writing, with topical essays and real-world texts as the basis 
for written work and discussion. (Prerequisites: MLCS102 
and MLCS102L; Co-requisite: MLCS201L). Fall. 
 
MLCS201L.  Spanish III Lab (1). 
Writing, discussion, and textual-analysis laboratory to 
accompany MLCS201. (Co-requisite: MLCS201). Fall. 
MLCS202.  Spanish IV (3).   
Additional development of speaking, listening, reading, and 
writing in Spanish, with films, television, and the discussion 
of current events. Emphasis will be placed on the varied 
cultures of the Spanish-speaking peoples in the US, Latin 
America, and Spain. (Prerequisites: MLCS201 and 
MLCS201L; Co-requisite: MLCS202L).  
 
MLCS202L.  Spanish IV Lab (1). 
Writing, discussion, and textual-analysis laboratory to 
accompany MLCS202.  Emphasis will be placed on 
different writing genres, as well as peer editing.  
(Co-requisite: MLCS202).  
 
MLCS215.  Spanish for Social Services, Criminal 
Justice and the Health Professions (3).  
For future professionals in business, social services, 
education, health, and law enforcement. Students will work 
as a group on common language functions, as well as 
individually to develop vocabulary and language skills 
specific to their disciplines. (Prerequisites: MLCS202 and 
MLCS202L; Co-requisite: MLCS215L). 
 
MLCS215L.  Spanish for Social Services, Criminal 
Justice and the Health Professions Lab (1) 
Students will work individually, with instructor’s guidance, 
to develop language and vocabulary skills specific to their 
future profession. (Co-requisite: MLCS215). 
 
MLCS216.  Spanish for Business, Marketing and 
Management (3). 
A review of Spanish language, grammar and cultural 
practice as it related to the business world internationally 
and in the U.S.  Emphasis will be placed on finance and 
economics, marketing, advertising, and workplace culture 
among the Spanish-speaking peoples.  (Prerequisites: 
MLCS202 and MLCS202L). 
 
MLCS216L.  Spanish for Business, Marketing and 
Management Lab (1). 
A review of Spanish language, grammar and cultural 
practice as it related to the business world internationally 
and in the U.S.  Emphasis will be placed on finance and 
economics, marketing, advertising, and workplace culture 
Course Descriptions 
 
244 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
among the Spanish-speaking peoples.  (Prerequisites: 
MLCS202 and MLCS202L). 
 
MLCS220.  Intermediate Spanish Conversation (2).  
Development of speaking and comprehension skills in 
Spanish, through pronunciation practice, review of grammar 
and structures, vocabulary-building activities, dialogues, 
individual reports, discussions, enhanced with use of audio-
visual aids. (Prerequisites: MLCS102 and MLCS102L or 
equivalent).  Open to freshmen. Fall. 
 
MLCS310.  Spanish Peninsular Literature & Culture  
(3) (HUMANITIES).  
Reading and discussion of major works of Spain and their 
cultural relevance. The course addresses higher- level 
language skills in Spanish while developing a knowledge 
base of Spanish literature and culture. Repeatable once for 
credit. (Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or 
equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCS310L).  
 
MLCS310L.  Spanish Peninsular Literature & Culture 
Lab (1) (HUMANITIES). 
Writing and discussion workshop to accompany MLCS310. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; 
Co-requisite: MLCS310).  
 
MLCS320.  Spanish-American Literatures & Cultures  
(3) (HUMANITIES).  
Reading and discussion of major works of Mexican, Central 
and South American, and US Latino/a literature. Focus on 
higher-level language skills in Spanish and the cultural 
diversity of the Spanish-speaking peoples in the Americas. 
Repeatable once for credit. (Prerequisites: MLCS202 and 
MLCS202L or equivalent; Co-requisite: MLCS320L). Fall. 
 
MLCS320L.  Spanish-American Literatures & 
 Cultures Lab (1) (HUMANITIES). 
Writing and discussion workshop to accompany MLCS320. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; 
Co-requisite: MLCS320). Fall. 
 
MLCS340.  The Spanish-Speaking World (3).    
Overview of the history, geography, societies and 
institutions of the Spanish- speaking peoples throughout the 
world.    This course will help students to prepare for the 
Michigan Teacher Certification Test in Spanish, although it 
is not limited to Teacher Education students. (Prerequisites: 
MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; Co-requisite: 
MLCS340L).  
 
MLCS340L.  The Spanish-Speaking World Lab (1). 
Writing and discussion workshop to accompany MLCS340. 
Emphasis will be placed on peer-editing activities. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; 
Co-requisite: MLCS340).  
 
MLCS350.  Advanced Spanish Language (3).  
Listening, speaking and reading integrated with writing 
skills. Emphasis is on the process and steps for writing 
successfully in Spanish. Repeatable once for credit. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; 
and CCC102 when taken as a Writing Intensive course; Co-
requisite: MLCS350L).  
 
 
MLCS350L.  Advanced Spanish Language Lab (1) 
Peer-editing workshop to accompany MLCS350. Emphasis 
will be placed on editing and revision activities. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent; 
and CCC102 when taken as a Writing Intensive course; Co-
requisite: MLCS350).  
 
 
MLCS360.  Advanced Spanish Conversation (2).  
Newspapers, magazines, television and radio as source 
material for topics discussed. Repeatable once for credit. 
(Prerequisites: MLCS202 and MLCS202L or equivalent). 
 
 
MLCS370.  Hispanic Film (3). (Humanities) 
This course explores Spanish Language film from the 20th 
and 21st centuries, as well as its cultural impact on history 
and Spanish speaking societies.  The course will examine 
major Hispanic films, filmmakers, directors and cinematic 
periods.  (Prerequisites: MLCS102 and MLCS102L). 
 
MLCS370L.  Hispanic Film Lab (1). (Humanities) 
This course explores Spanish Language film from the 20th 
and 21st centuries, as well as its cultural impact on history 
and Spanish speaking societies.  The course will examine 
major Hispanic films, filmmakers, directors and cinematic 
periods.  (Prerequisites: MLCS102 and MLCS102L). 
 
 
Special and Advanced Courses 
 
MLCX199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
MLCX250.  Special Topics (1-3).  
Designed particularly for non- majors, the course can be 
repeated with a different topic. 
 
MLCX299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
MLCX399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
MLCX451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Advanced study in areas beyond regular course offerings. 
(Prerequisite: departmental permission). 
Course Descriptions 
 
245 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
 
MLCX490.  Study Abroad Capstone Seminar (1).  
Students returning from a study abroad semester will present 
a portfolio of journals and essays to reflect on their 
experience.  Specific topics to be addressed:  The 
relationship between language and culture, the student’s 
self-understanding as a language learner, and the impact of 
the study-abroad experience on the student’s chosen career 
as a teacher or professional. Required for Teacher Ed majors 
and minors, recommended for other language majors. 
(Prerequisite: Study Abroad).  
 
MLCX491.  Senior Research (2).     
Majors conduct extensive research on a topic of their 
choosing and in conjunction with their advisor primarily in 
the target language. A bibliography and a 3 to 5- page 
prospectus is presented to the department. (Prerequisite: 
Senior standing and permission of department.) Fall,  
 
MLCX492.  Senior Research Presentation (2).  
Twenty-page paper in the target language according to MLA 
style, along with a 3 to 5-page English summary, presented 
to the Department and the College. (Prerequisite: MLC491). 
Fall,  
 
MLCX499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Music (MUS) 
 
Music Theory 
First year music majors and minors must take a theory 
placement exam prior to registering for theory courses. 
Placement exams are offered during freshman orientation or 
by appointment. 
  
MUS100: Foundations in Music Studies (2) 
This course is intended to provide the foundational skills 
necessary for success as a music major or minor. 
Rudimentary concepts include the grand staff, key 
signatures, time signatures, notation, major and minor 
scales, simple and compound time, and chord construction. 
Concepts of ear training and basic keyboard skills will be 
introduced. 
 
MUS101.  Theory I (3).  
Understanding the structure and function of the language of 
music with emphasis on modes, intervals, rhythm, cadences, 
melody writing, triads, non-chord tones, first species 
counterpoint, 
and 
four-part 
harmonic 
structures.  
(Prerequisite: MUS100 or placement exam Corequisite: 
MUS103). Fall,  
 
 
MUS105.  Essentials of Music for Elementary  
Teachers (2).  
Development of fundamental skills required to teach 
elementary classroom music; incorporates song material 
which can be applied in the instruction of children. 
(Prerequisite: Elementary Education program permission). 
 
 
MUS106.   Music in Film (3) (ARTS). 
This course will study the interaction of music and imagery 
in film, with an emphasis on the mature of musical 
meaning.  The history and development of film music and 
its impact on the audience will be examined through 
lectures, readings, and screenings.   
 
MUS107.  Introduction to Music (3) (ARTS).  
Explores the development of music from antiquity to the 
present day, helping students develop an appreciation for 
and understanding of a wide variety of musical styles and 
techniques. Emphasizes Western Art Music as well as non-
Western and popular music. Fall. 
 
MUS110.  Music Activities (1-3).  
Participation in an activity of particular interest to students 
of music and faculty. Examples may be pit orchestra, opera 
chorus, assistant director. Open to all college students. 
(Prerequisite: permission of department). No more than 
eight hours of combined credit in communication, theatre 
and music activities, including lessons and ensembles, may 
be applied towards graduation credit. 
 
MUS113.  Popular Music in America (3) (ARTS). 
This course offers a survey of American Popular Music from 
the nineteenth century to the present day.  Beginning with 
Tin Pan Alley and Broadway, this course traces major 
developments in American popular music, such as rock and 
roll, country music, soul, funk, disco, punk rock, and hip-
hop.  These developments will be examined alongside the 
social, political, racial, economic, and cultural contexts of 
the genre.  
 
MUS114.  History of Rock & Roll (3) (ARTS) 
This course offers a survey of Rock & Roll music, from its 
beginnings to the present day. Moving decade by decade, the 
course presents the evolution of the music through the 
artists, world events, historical figures, and popular attitudes 
that led to the many different subgenres of the art form 
prevalent today. 
 
MUS115.  Keyboard I (1).  
Course Descriptions 
 
246 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Basic keyboard skills. Focus on scales, chord construction, 
arpeggios, and simple songs.. Fall,  
 
MUS 205.  Theory II (3).   
Understanding the structure and function of the language of 
music with emphasis on harmonic analysis and part-writing, 
seventh chords, modulation, secondary dominant chords, 
and binary and ternary forms. 
(Prerequisite: MUS101; Co-requisites:  MUS206). Fall, 
 
 
 
MUS103.  Aural Skills I (2).  
Perception of rhythm, melody, harmony and form through 
solfege and aural dictation, with emphasis on major keys in 
duple and compound time. (Prerequisite: MUS100 or 
placement exam; Co-requisite: MUS101). Fall,  
 
MUS120.  String Methods (1).  
Develop skills to model and work effectively with students 
on all string instruments in group beginning instrument 
classes. Students gain knowledge and skills for rehearsing 
large groups in elementary and secondary ensemble settings. 
(Prerequisite: permission for department).  
 
MUS122.  Brass Methods (1).  
Develop skills to model and work effectively with students 
on all brass instruments in group beginning instrument 
classes. Students gain knowledge and skills for rehearsing 
large groups in elementary and secondary ensemble settings. 
(Prerequisite: Written departmental permission). Fall. 
 
MUS124.  Percussion Methods (1).  
Develop the skills to model and work effectively with 
students on all percussion instruments in group beginning 
instrument classes. Students gain knowledge and skills for 
rehearsing large groups in elementary and secondary 
ensemble settings. (Prerequisite: Written departmental 
permission).  
 
MUS126.  Woodwind Methods (1).  
Develop skills to model and work effectively with students  
on all woodwind instruments in group beginning 
instrument classes. Students gain knowledge and skills for 
rehearsing large groups in elementary and secondary    
ensemble settings. (Prerequisite: Written departmental 
permission). Fall. 
 
MUS128.  Singers Diction (English/French) (1).  
Students shall learn rules of diction for English and French 
song literature.  Techniques for preparing and performing 
songs, text analysis and translation, as well as the application 
of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) will be 
incorporated. (Co-requisite: MUS237). Offered as needed. 
 
MUS129.  Singers Diction (Italian/German) (1).   
Students shall learn rules of diction for Italian and German 
song literature.  Techniques for preparing and performing 
songs, text analysis and translation, as well as the application 
of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) will be 
incorporated. (Co-requisite: MUS237). Offered as needed. 
 
MUS130.  Voice Class (1) (ARTS).  
The fundamentals of breath control and tone production, 
with emphasis on individual instruction in preparing and 
performing standard song literature  May be repeated for 
credit up to 3 semesters Offered as needed. 
 
MUS131.  Foundations in Music Education (2).  
Exploratory introduction to the basic philosophies and 
methodologies of music education. School observations, 
teacher interviews and classroom discussion provide context 
for subsequent courses in music and teacher education. 
 
 
MUS140.  Adrian College Choir (1) (ARTS).  
Repertoire covers a wide variety of music ranging from 
classic to contemporary. Performances include concerts and 
special college events. Open to all students; no audition 
necessary. Fall,  
 
MUS142.  Piano Class (1) (ARTS).  
For non-music majors who have had little or no keyboard 
training. Basic instruction in music reading and piano 
technique.  May be repeated for credit up to 3 semesters. 
 
MUS143.  Guitar Class (1) (ARTS). 
Introduces the fundamentals of guitar playing with emphasis 
on strumming, reading chord charts, and basic technique. 
May be repeated for credit up to 3 semesters. Offered as 
needed.  
 
MUS145.  Women’s A Cappella Ensemble (1) (ARTS). 
Students will rehearse and perform in a select ensemble of 
Women’s voices, without instrumental accompaniment.  A 
wide variety of repertoire will be explored, including pop 
music.  Audition required.    
 
MUS150.  Lenawee Community Chorus (1) (ARTS).  
Includes singers from the community and from Adrian 
College. Emphasis is on the performance of large choral 
works with orchestra. Open to all students. No audition 
necessary. Fall,  
 
MUS152.  Guitar Ensemble (1) (ARTS).   
Course Descriptions 
 
247 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Students learn ensemble repertoire for guitar spanning 
classic to contemporary. Performances include campus 
events, concerts and recitals.  Open to all students. 
(Prerequisite: MUS226). Offered as needed. 
 
MUS160.  Adrian College Chamber Choir (1) (ARTS).  
Advanced repertoire ranging in style from classic to 
contemporary. Performs in concert and special events on 
campus and in the community. Annual choir tour. Audition 
required. Fall,  
 
MUS163.  Adrian Jazz Choir (1) (ARTS).  
Students will rehearse and perform standard and 
contemporary jazz charts drawn from the 20th and 21st 
Century.  Students will have the opportunity to perform on 
and off campus.  Open to all students. 
 
MUS165.  Chamber Winds (1) (ARTS).  
A chamber ensemble covering wind music of all style 
periods. Students will gain knowledge in the performance of 
chamber music with emphasis on balance, control, 
intonation and independence of parts. Performances are 
required outside of class.  Open to all students. 
 
MUS170.  Adrian College Orchestra (1) (ARTS). 
Students will rehearse and perform standard orchestra 
literature of the Classic, Romantic and Modern Eras. 
Students will participate in three or four concert events per 
year. Open to string players. 
 
MUS173.  Chamber Strings (1) (ARTS). 
A chamber ensemble covering string music of all styles. 
Students will gain knowledge in the performance of 
chamber music with emphasis on balance, control, 
intonation and independence of parts. Performances are 
required outside of class.  Open to all students.  
 
MUS175.  Chamber Brass (1) (ARTS). 
A chamber ensemble covering brass music of all styles. 
Students will gain knowledge in the performance of 
chamber music with emphasis on balance, control, 
intonation and independence of parts. Performances are 
required outside of class.  Open to all students.  
 
MUS178.  Musical Theatre Orchestra (1)  
Provides students with opportunities for musical growth in 
rehearsal and performance.  A variety of musical theatre 
literature will be used as the medium to present a diverse 
exposure to related history and culture, as well as a forum to 
develop the crafts of individual and collective musical 
artisanship. Outcomes include a connection to learning 
through a lifetime, thinking critically, identifying problems 
and solutions, and engaging in creative arts. (Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor).  
 
MUS180.  Concert/Marching Band (1) (ARTS). 
Students perform field shows in the fall and concert 
literature in the  Repertoire represents wide cross-
section of traditional works Performances include 
appearances at college events, field shows at football games 
and concerts Open to all students Fall.  
 
MUS181.  Drumline Techniques (1).   
Students learn, practice and perform drumline drill in 
preparation for marching band.  Open to all students. 
Offered as needed. 
 
 
MUS183.  Percussion Ensemble (1) (ARTS). 
Students learn ensemble repertoire for traditional and non-
traditional percussion spanning classic to contemporary and 
including world music. Performances include campus 
events, concerts and recitals.  Open to all students.  
 
MUS185.  Jazz Ensemble (1) (ARTS). 
The Jazz Ensemble is dedicated to the contemporary jazz 
idiom, concentrating on per- forming modern jazz and blues 
compositions. The ensemble offers many opportunities for 
learning and developing the techniques of improvisation and 
jazz performance. Emphasis is on performance excellence 
and jazz proficiency. Open to all students. Fall,  
 
MUS187.   Chamber Jazz (1) (ARTS). 
A performance-based small jazz combo that emphasizes 
skill-building and improvisation over idiomatic jazz 
standard repertoire though the use of “lead sheets” and other 
materials.  Open to all appropriate instruments or voice, by 
audition or instructions permission.  Offered as needed. 
 
MUS195.  Chamber Music (1) (ARTS). 
Selected students are incorporated into small ensembles to 
perform literature from all periods of music history. (Open 
to all students). Offered as needed. 
 
MUS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
MUS 206.   Aural Skills II (2).  
Perception of rhythm, melody, harmony and form through 
solfege and aural dictation, with emphasis on minor keys in 
duple and compound time. 
 (Prerequisite: MUS103;  
Co-requisites: MUS205). Fall,  
 
MUS 207.  Keyboard II (1).  
Course Descriptions 
 
248 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Continuation of Keyboard I. Major and minor scales, chord 
construction, arpeggios, simple harmonic cadences, chord 
progressions, sight reading skills, and songs. 
 (Prerequisite:  MUS115). Fall,  
 
MUS 208.  Theory III (2).   
Understanding the structure and function of music with 
emphasis on two-voice 18th-century counterpoint, fugue, 
borrowed chords, Neapolitan and augmented 6th chords, 
variation techniques, sonata-allegro and rondo forms. 
 (Prerequisite: MUS205; Co-requisites: MUS209). Fall, 
 
 
MUS 209.  Aural Skills III (2).  
Perception of rhythm, melody, harmony and form through 
solfege and aural dictation, with emphasis on chromatics, 
syncopation and modulation to closely related keys. 
(Prerequisite: MUS206; Co-requisites: MUS208). Fall, 
 
 
MUS212.  Opera Workshop (1).  
Students explore various operatic roles through the 
preparation and performance of arias, scenes, and/or one 
acts. Singing, acting, and movement exercises provide 
practical experience and develop skills for performances and 
auditions. May be repeated for credit up to 3 semesters. 
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor;  
Co-requisite: MUS237). Fall. 
 
 
MUS213.  Musical Theatre Workshop (1).  
Explore various musical theatre roles through the 
preparation and performance of songs or scenes.  Singing, 
acting and movement exercises provide practical experience 
and develop skills for performances and auditions.  May be 
repeated up to 3 semesters. (Prerequisite: permission of 
instructor; Co-requisite: MUS237).  
 
MUS 210.  Keyboard III (1).  
Continuation of Keyboard II. Major and minor scales in all 
key areas, construction of seventh chords, arpeggios in all 
key areas, chord progressions, sight reading, transposition of 
simple melodies and songs. (Prerequisite: MUS207). Fall, 
 
 
MUS220-249.  Applied Music (1) (ARTS).  
Private instruction in all orchestral and band instruments, 
piano, organ, guitar and voice. The aim is thorough 
development of all phases of performance, technique, style, 
musicianship, memorization, interpretation, and repertoire. 
Music majors and minors are required to participate in juries 
at the end of each semester of applied study.  Additional fees 
are required for these courses.  See instructor for details on 
attendance. Music majors and minors must attend Studio 
Class every Tuesday at noon, concurrent with Applied 
Music. (Three semester hours of the same applied 
instrument will apply toward the arts distribution 
requirement.) 
 
MUS299.  Experimental Course (1-3).  
 
MUS305.  Theory IV (2).   
Understanding the structure and function of music with 
emphasis on extended harmonies (9th, 11th, and 13th 
chords), altered dominants, chromatic mediants, devices of 
the 
Romantic 
period, 
devices 
of 
Post-Romantic, 
Impressionistic, and 20th-century styles, including twelve-
tone techniques (Prerequisite: MUS208;  
Co-requisites: MUS306). Fall,  
 
 
MUS306.  Aural Skills IV (2).  
Perception of rhythm, melody, harmony and form through 
solfege and aural dictation, with emphasis on modulations, 
mixed meters, and modes. (Prerequisite: MUS203; Co-
requisites: MUS209 and MUS305). Fall,  
 
MUS307.  Keyboard IV (1).  
Continuation of Keyboard III. Includes all skills necessary 
to pass the Piano Proficiency Exam, including scales, 
arpeggios, chord construction, chord progressions, melodic 
harmonization and transposition, and sight reading. 
(Prerequisite: MUS210). Fall,  
 
MUS303.  Conducting (2).  
Introduction to score preparation, basic beat patterns and 
usage, ear training, selection of the appropriate tempo, 
foreign terms, analysis of text for musical meaning, 
leadership development, rehearsal techniques, and stage 
presence. (Prerequisite: MUS102). Fall. 
 
MUS304.  Conducting II (3) 
This course provides a more concentrated and further 
advancement of conducting technique for the future music 
professional. More advanced conducting techniques will be 
covered including cues, compound meter, score study, 
rehearsal 
techniques, 
multiple 
historical 
styles 
of 
conducting, and baton technique. Students will have the 
opportunity to practice skills in front of live musicians, as 
well as with recordings. 
 
MUS310.  Junior Recital (1).  
Preparation and presentation of a junior recital approved by 
the department and supervised by a member of the music 
faculty. Must be taken concurrently with applied music 
Course Descriptions 
 
249 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
lessons. (Prerequisite: permission of department). Offered as 
needed. 
 
MUS316.  Music History before 1750 (3).  
Music from Antiquity through the Baroque Era is studied 
through an introduction to the leading composers, genres 
and forms. Emphasis is on listening, analysis, research and 
writing, and the application of these skills in the preparation 
of papers or projects. (Prerequisite: MUS101).  
 
MUS318.  Music History from 1750 to 1880 (3).  
Music of the Classic and Romantic Periods are studied 
through an introduction to the leading composers, genres 
and forms. Emphasis is on listening, analysis, research and 
writing, and the application of these skills in the preparation 
of papers or projects. (Prerequisite: MUS101). Fall. 
 
MUS319.  Music History after 1880 (3).  
Music after 1880 is studied through an introduction to the 
leading composers, genres and forms. Emphasis is on 
listening, analysis, research and writing, and the application 
of these skills in the preparation of papers or projects. 
(Prerequisite: MUS101). Fall. 
 
MUS320.  Music of the East/Far East (3)  
(NON-WESTERN).  
An introduction to the important genres forms, tuning 
systems and instruments of the Middle and Far East. 
Emphasis is on listening, analysis, research and writing, and 
the application of these skills in the preparation of papers 
and projects. (Prerequisites: MUS101 and CCC101 when 
Writing Intensive).  
 
MUS332.  Vocal Pedagogy (1).  
Provides the skills to model and work effectively with 
elementary, middle and high school students on developing 
the solo vocal instrument in beginning music classes or 
private voice studio.  Offered as needed.  (Prerequisites: 3 
credits of MUS237). 
 
MUS333 Song Literature and Interpretation (1) 
This course is designed to develop the text and musical 
interpretation skills fundamental to the modern singing 
actor. Students will analyze songs to understand meaning 
and broaden their exposure to the genre of classical art song. 
Goals of this course include recognition and comprehension 
of poetry and musical styles in the standard art song 
repertoire. (Prerequisite: 2 credits of MUS237 (Applied 
Voice) 
 
MUS341.  Special Topics in Music (3) (ARTS).  
An introduction to various topics in music, focusing on one 
primary area each semester offered. Topics may include 
Music, Business, Music Technology, or Composition. For 
non-majors interested in music without previous musical 
experience. Also open to majors for elective credit. This 
course may be repeated once for credit, provided the course 
topic is different from the course previously taken. Offered 
as needed. 
 
MUS362.  Instrument Methods & Materials (2).  
Exploration of techniques and strategies for teaching middle 
and high school band and orchestra classes Development of 
rehearsal techniques and familiarity with age-appropriate repertoire.  
 
MUS363.  Choral Methods & Materials (2).  
Exploration of techniques and strategies for teaching middle 
and high school choirs. Development of rehearsal 
techniques and familiarity with age-appropriate repertoire. 
 
 
MUS371.  Music in the Elementary Schools (2).  
The student will plan, execute, and evaluate music activities 
in relation to the individual child and to the group at the 
elementary level. The student will employ the most effective 
contemporary methods in facilitating planned music 
activities. Students will use materials available to music 
education for use in today’s classroom including exceptional 
(both gifted and special needs) students. Music activities 
will include multiethnic and multicultural music. Fall. 
 
MUS399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
A maximum of 2 semester hours of MUS399 are allowed 
toward the music major. 
 
MUS401.  Musical Form (2).  
The study of musical composition, with particular reference 
to its formal design. Architectural elements in music are 
traced, from the phrase through larger formal designs. 
(Prerequisite: MUS202). Fall. 
 
MUS402.  Orchestration (2).  
Designed to provide students with knowledge of the 
capabilities of band and orchestral instruments and 
elementary orchestration techniques. Emphasis is on 
arranging for small groups, followed by arranging for full 
symphony orchestra or band using computer software. 
(Prerequisite: MUS202).  
 
MUS410.  Capstone: Senior Recital (1).  
Preparation and presentation of a senior recital approved by 
the department and supervised by a member of the music 
faculty. Must be taken concurrently with applied music 
lessons. (Prerequisite: permission of department).  Offered 
as needed. 
Course Descriptions 
 
250 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
MUS419-449.   Upper Level Applied Music (1) (ARTS).  
Advanced private instruction in all orchestral and band 
instruments, piano, organ, guitar and voice. The aim is 
thorough development of all phases of performance, 
technique, 
style, 
musicianship, 
memorization, 
interpretation, and repertoire.  (Prerequisite: completion of 
4 credits of a 200-level applied music course) 
 
Music majors and minors are required to participate in juries 
at the end of each semester of applied study  Additional fees 
are required for these courses  See instructor for details on 
attendance  
 
Music majors and minors must attend Studio Class every 
Tuesday at noon, concurrent with Applied Music. 
 
MUS450.  Capstone: Senior Project (1).  
An individual project dealing with music at a level 
appropriate for a senior music major, which must be 
approved by the department and supervised by a member of 
the music faculty A presentation of the results of the project 
must be made to a committee of music faculty. (Prerequisite: 
permission of department) Offered as needed. 
 
MUS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Exploration of an area in music of special interest to the 
student; the particular study and hours are arranged by the 
staff. A maximum of 2 semester hours is allowed toward the 
music major. (Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
MUS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Philosophy (PHIL) 
 
PHIL101.  Introduction to Philosophy (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
The meaning and scope of philosophy and the major 
problems with which it is concerned. Fall. 
 
PHIL102.  Contemporary Moral Problems (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
An introduction to philosophical perspectives on some of the 
important ethical controversies facing our society, with a 
focus on developing and critically analyzing reasons used to 
support a moral position. Topics vary, but may include 
abortion, cloning, the legalization of drugs, physician 
assisted suicide, animal rights, and the death penalty. Fall, 
 
 
 
 
PHIL104.  Introduction to Ethics (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
This course is an introduction to moral theory. We will 
address questions such as: What does it mean to flourish as 
a human being?  What makes actions right or wrong? Are 
there moral facts, or is it all just subjective? Students will be 
encouraged to discuss, share, and defend their own views.  
Fall. 
 
PHIL105.  Logic (3) (PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
How arguments are formulated and evaluated, analysis of 
the role of language in communication and training in the 
detection of common fallacies. Includes categorical, 
propositional, and predicate logic. Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL110.  Philosophy through Film (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
This course aims to examine and critically evaluate various 
philosophical themes by means of the visual medium of 
film.  Such themes include: human nature, the nature of 
reality, and moral problems.  Films may include popular re- 
leases, silent films and surrealist films. The course will also 
integrate philosophical texts.  Fall. 
 
PHIL199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
PHIL200.  Philosophy Topics (3). 
A course in a field of philosophy, history of philosophy, 
philosophical movement or set of philosophical problems.  
The course material covered in this course does not overlap 
with material offered in other philosophy courses. Offered 
as needed. 
 
PHIL201.  Introduction to Jurisprudence (3).   
This course is an introduction to the theoretical and 
philosophical underpinnings of the United States judicial 
system It will investigate the concept of “law’ as it has been 
applied throughout the course of western civilization  It will 
also explore the works of philosophers who inspired the 
authors of the U.S Constitution and Bill of Rights, the 
origins of the various schools of judicial philosophy and the 
often complicated relationship between moral and legal 
reasoning Fall. 
 
PHIL205.  Writing and Argument (3).   
This course will focus in the development of the skills 
involved in philosophical reading, writing, and oral 
presentation. We will be working with philosophical 
materials; however the goal of the course is the development 
of proficiency with these skills. (Prerequisites: one PHIL 
course and CCC101 when offered as Writing Intensive). 
Offered as needed. 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
251 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
PHIL231.  Mock Trial (1-3).  
An introduction to trial advocacy.  Students will learn about 
the criminal law and the judicial process, cross examination, 
evidentiary objections, and legal arguments.  Students will 
read, analyze and try a specific court case.  May be repeated.  
Students may only take a maximum of three credits. 
 
PHIL299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
PHIL300.  Topics in Philosophy (1-3).  
A special topic or topics including practical applications of 
philosophy or the relationship of philosophy to other aspects 
of life. Offered as needed. (Prerequisite: one previous PHIL 
course). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL301.  Philosophy of Religion (3).  
An inquiry into the scope and function of religion, the nature 
and destiny of human beings, the existence and nature of 
God and other selected problems. Cross-listed with 
RELG301.  Students who have taken RELG301 for credit 
may not take PHIL301 for credit. (Prerequisite: one course 
in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL304.  Ethics (3).  
An examination of the major ethical theories of ancient and 
modern times and their impact upon traditional and 
contemporary ethical problems. Special attention is paid to 
the development of ethical thinking and the application of 
ethical 
theory 
to 
contemporary 
moral 
problems. 
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PHIL321.  Science, Skepticism and Faith (3).  
Basic course in epistemology and metaphysics. Topics 
include the distinction between scientific and non-scientific 
types of knowledge (if any), the difference between “belief” 
and “knowledge” (if any), theories of “truth”, and the case 
for and implications of skepticism. (Prerequisite: one course 
in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL328.  Liberation Theology (3).  
During the 20th Century a number of movements within 
Christianity turned to the teachings of Jesus and Hebrew 
prophets, and Marxist social analysis, to argue and work for 
social justice. Examines the origins of Liberation Theology 
in Latin America in the 1960s and the Black Powe struggle 
in the U.S. Other topics include Feminist, Womanist, 
Ecological and Gay/Lesbian liberation theologies. Cross-
listed with RELG328.  Students who have taken PHIL328 
for credit may not take RELG328 for credit. (Prerequisite: 
one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
 
PHIL331. Philosophy of Law (3).  
This course examines the theoretical and philosophical 
aspects of law.  Materials will be drawn from actual legal 
cases, as well as writings by philosophers and lawyers. 
Topics may include legal reasoning, the nature and purpose 
of 
law, 
criminal 
responsibility, 
negligence, 
civil 
disobedience, the relationship of law and morality, and 
omissions and the duty to rescue (Prerequisite: one course in 
PHIL or RELG).  
 
PHIL332.  Political Philosophy (3).  
An examination of fundamental concepts and issues in 
political theory, such as the justification and limits of 
political authority, and the relationship between the 
individual and the community, the nature of freedom and 
obligation, and the obligation to obey the law.    
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PHIL334.  Philosophy and Ethics of Sport (3). 
An exploration of the philosophical dimensions of sports 
and their ethical implications.  This includes metaphysical, 
ontological and epistemological foundation which shape 
roles, codes and rules that define spots. Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL344.  Biomedical Ethics (3).  
Ethical issues created by recent advances in medical 
technology, including questions such as the relationship 
between the health care provider and the patient; truth and 
information; autonomy and diminished capacity; and 
genetic engineering within the context of moral reasoning. 
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PHIL351.  Ancient Greek Philosophy (3).  
Examination of the philosophical systems of the Ancient 
Greeks and Romans. Special attention given to the work of 
Plato and Aristotle. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL352.  Christian Heresies and Orthodoxies (3).  
Development of Christian theology from Jewish and 
Hellenic thought. Focus on major leaders, thinkers, and 
movements during this time. Emphasis on Augustine, 
Pseudo-Dionysius, 
and 
Aquinas. 
Cross-listed 
with 
RELG352.  Students who have taken PHIL352 for credit 
may not take RELG352 for credit. (Prerequisite: one course 
in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL353.  Modern Philosophy (3).  
Exploration of the foundations of modern philosophy, 
including the contributions of Descartes, Hume and Kant. 
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Fall. 
Course Descriptions 
 
252 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
PHIL354.  19th & 20th Century Christian  
Theology (3).  
Continental Theology from Schleiermacher and Hegel to the 
present. Will include dialectical thinkers, existentialists, 
feminists, and liberationists.  Cross-listed with RELG354.  
Students who have taken PHIL354 for credit may not take 
RELG354 for credit.  (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
PHIL400.  Capstone: Senior Thesis (3).  
Senior research project stressing the application of research 
skills and the synthesis of knowledge in the discipline of 
philosophy. (Prerequisites: senior standing and permission 
of department). Offered as needed. 
 
PHIL451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
PHIL499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Physics (PHYS) 
 
PHYS101. Introductory Physics I (3) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
This two-semester course sequence is an algebra-based 
survey 
of 
physics. 
Topics 
include 
mechanics, 
thermodynamics, electricity and magnetism, and modern 
physics.  (Does not count towards Physics major or minor).  
(Prerequisite: MATH115 or placement beyond MATH115; 
MATH115 can also be taken as a 
 co-requisite). Fall. 
 
PHYS102.  Introductory Physics II (3) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
This two-semester course sequence is an algebra-based 
survey 
of 
physics. 
Topics 
include 
mechanics, 
thermodynamics, electricity and magnetism, and modern 
physics.  Three lectures per week. (Does not count towards 
Physics major or minor).  (Prerequisite: PHYS101).  Spring 
 
PHYS103.  Introductory Physics Laboratory I (1) 
(NATURAL SCIENCE).    
Through experiments, students explore and verify many 
concepts in classical physics. Topics are drawn from 
mechanics, wave motion, sound, and thermodynamics.  One 
3-hour laboratory per week.  (Co-requisite: PHYS101). Fall. 
 
PHYS104.  Introductory Physics Laboratory II (1) 
(NATURAL SCIENCE).  
Through experiments, students explore and verify many 
concepts in classical physics. Topics are drawn from 
electricity, magnetism, optics, and modern physics. One 3-
hour laboratory per week.  (Co-requisite: PHYS102). 
 
 
PHYS105.  Inquiry Physics for Elementary  
Teachers (3) (NATURAL SCIENCE). 
Survey of physics for students in elementary education. 
Topics include Newton’s laws of motion, momentum, 
energy, states of matter, pressure in fluids, temperature, 
heat, wave phenomena, electricity & magnetism, optics, and 
atomic, nuclear & particle physics.  Three lectures per week.  
(Prerequisite: 
MATH101; 
Co-requisite: 
PHYS106).  
Offered as needed 
 
PHYS106.  Inquiry Physics for Elementary Teachers 
Laboratory (1) (NATURAL SCIENCE). 
Laboratory course to accompany PHYS105.  Topics include 
Newton’s laws of motion, friction, momentum, energy, 
buoyancy, thermodynamics, sound, electric circuits, 
magnetic fields, and optics.  Emphasizes proper laboratory 
techniques and careful collection and analysis of 
experimental data.  Two hours laboratory per week.  
(Prerequisite: 
MATH101; 
Co-requisite: 
PHYS105).  
Offered as needed . 
 
PHYS110.  Descriptive Astronomy (4) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE). 
Observational and theoretical studies of the solar system and 
the extra-solar system. Topics include the telescope, planets 
and their satellites, asteroids, comets, meteors, the sun as a 
star, characteristics of stars, galaxies, interstellar matter, and 
the possibility of life elsewhere in the universe. Three 
lectures, one 2-hour laboratory per week. Fall of even years. 
 
PHYS111.  Earth & Space Science for the  
Elementary Teacher (4). 
Survey of earth science for students in elementary 
education.  Topics include the geosphere, hydrosphere, 
atmosphere, weather, the solar system, the galaxy and the 
universe.  Earth Science Michigan Curriculum Framework 
and the benchmarks associated with it will be examined.  
Three lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week.  
(Prerequisite: MATH101).  Offered as needed  
 
PHYS199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
PHYS205.  General Physics I (3) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
This two-semester course sequence is a calculus-based 
survey of physics including mechanics, thermodynamics, 
electricity and magnetism, optics, and relativity.  Three 
Course Descriptions 
 
253 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
lectures per week. (Prerequisites:  MATH135; Co-requisite: 
PHYS205.  
Open 
to 
freshmen 
who 
meet 
these 
requirements). Fall,    
 
PHYS206.  General Physics II (3) (NATURAL 
SCIENCE).  
This two-semester course sequence is a calculus-based 
survey of physics including mechanics, thermodynamics, 
electricity and magnetism, optics, and relativity.  Three 
lectures 
per 
week. 
(Prerequisites: 
 MATH135 
and 
PHYS205.  
Open 
to 
freshmen 
who 
meet 
these 
requirements). Fall, Spring 
 
PHYS209.  General Physics Laboratory I (1) 
(NATURAL SCIENCE).  
Principles of classical physics are explored and verified 
through experiments.   Emphasis is on measurement 
techniques and methods of data analysis.  Topics are drawn 
from mechanics, wave motion, sound and thermodynamics. 
One 3-hour laboratory per week.  
(Co-requisite: PHYS205). (Open to freshman if all 
prerequisites are satisfied). Fall.  
 
PHYS210.  General Physics Laboratory II (1) 
(NATURAL SCIENCE).   
Principles of classical physics are explored and verified 
through experiments. Emphasis is on measurement 
techniques and methods of data analysis.  Topics are drawn 
from electricity, magnetism, and optics.  One 3-hour 
laboratory per week.  (Co-requisite: PHYS206). (Open to 
freshman).   
 
PHYS299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
PHYS320.  Electronics (3).  
An introduction to analog and digital electronics. Topics 
include DC and AC circuits, transistors, amplifiers, Boolean 
logic, logic circuits, analog-digital conversions, and 
applications. Two lectures and one 3-hour laboratory per 
week. (Prerequisites: PHYS206 and PHYS210). Fall of odd 
years. 
 
PHYS370.  Modern Physics (3).   
An introduction to the fundamentals of modern physics.  
Topics include special relativity, quantum theory, atomic 
physics, statistical physics, condensed-matter physics, 
nuclear structure, and elementary particles. (Prerequisites: 
PHYS206 and MATH215 or MATH305).  Fall of even 
years. 
 
PHYS390.  Astrophysics (3). 
This is a one-semester, calculus-based survey of modern 
astrophysics intended for junior or senior science majors.  
No formal background in astronomy is assumed.  Topics 
include early astronomy, orbital mechanics, planetary 
systems, stellar astrophysics, and galactic astronomy. 
(Prerequisites: PHYS206 and MATH205.)  Fall of even 
years. 
 
PHYS399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
PHYS401.  Classical Mechanics I (3). 
An introduction to classical dynamics.  Topics include the 
motions of particles and systems of particles in one, two, and 
three dimensions, oscillations, gravitation, Lagrangian & 
Hamiltonian dynamics, and motion in noninertial frames.  
(Prerequisites: PHYS206 and MATH215 or MATH305).  
Fall of odd years. 
 
PHYS402.  Classical Mechanics II (3). 
Advanced topics in classical dynamics including nonlinear 
oscillations, the motion of rigid bodies, coupled oscillations, 
continuous media and waves, and special relativity.  
(Prerequisites: PHYS401).  Offered occasionally. 
 
PHYS403.  Electromagnetic Theory I (3). 
An introduction to electrodynamics.  Topics include 
electrostatics, boundary value problems, electric fields in 
matter, magnetostatics, magnetic fields in matter, and 
Maxwell’s 
equations. 
(Prerequisites: 
PHYS206 
and 
MATH215 or MATH305).  Spring of even years. 
 
PHYS404.  Electromagnetic Theory II (3). 
Advanced topics in electrodynamics.  Topics include 
conservation laws, electromagnetic waves, potentials & 
fields, 
electromagnetic 
radiation, 
and 
relativistic 
electrodynamics  (Prerequisites:  PHYS403)  Offered 
occasionally.  
 
PHYS406.  Statistical and Thermal Physics (3).  
A study of thermodynamic phenomena using the methods of 
statistical 
mechanics. 
Application 
is 
made 
to 
paramagnetism, the Ising model, blackbody radiation, the 
ideal 
Fermi 
gas, 
and 
Bose-Einstein 
condensation. 
(Prerequisites: PHYS206 and MATH 215 or MATH305). 
Spring of even years.  
 
PHYS410.  Quantum Mechanics (3). 
An introduction to quantum mechanics.  Topics include the 
1-D Schrodinger equation, the square well, the harmonic 
oscillator, the 3-D Schrodinger equation with applications to 
the hydrogen atom, spin, identical particles, and time-
independent perturbation theory.  (Prerequisites: PHYS370 
and MATH305).  Spring of odd years. 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
254 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
PHYS420.  Capstone: Experimental Physics (2). 
Students conduct experiments from classical and modern 
physics, emphasizing experimental technique and data 
analysis.  Assigned readings and presentations on journal 
articles.  Course may be taken twice for credit.  
(Prerequisite: PHYS320 or PHYS370). Spring of odd years. 
 
PHYS430.  Topics in Physics (1-4). 
Investigations of advanced or specialized topics of current 
interest.  Topics and coverage varies with semester and 
instructor.  May be repeated for different topics.  
(Prerequisite: PHYS206).  Other prerequisites may be 
required depending on the topic offered. 
 
 
PHYS450.  Physics Research (1-3).  
Experimental or theoretical research in physics. May be 
repeated. (Prerequisite: instructor permission). Fall,  
 
PHYS451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Work may be either experimental or theoretical. May be 
repeated. (Prerequisite: departmental permission). 
 
 
 
PHYS452.  Capstone: Senior Research (1). 
Students will write a formal paper based either on 
theoretical, 
computational, 
or 
experimental 
physics 
research, or on a literature review.  (Prerequisite: 
Department permission).  
 
PHYS499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3) 
 
 
Courses in Political Science (PSCI) 
 
PSCI101.  American Federal Government (3) 
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
Examines the institutions of the American political system, 
including federalism, separation of powers, political 
parties, elections, and the rights of citizens. Fall,  
 
PSCI102.  State and Local Government (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
How state and local governments function, issues they face 
and how they relate to the federal government, with special 
emphasis on Michigan. Fall,  
 
PSCI136.  International Relations (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE). 
Analysis of the roles played by the United States and various 
other countries, international organizations, and individuals 
in international politics, along with significant global issues 
such as war and peace, economic development and trade, 
environmental policy, and human rights. Fall. 
 
PSCI160.  Comparing Democracies (3) 
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).   
Political institutions, policies, and practices of democracies 
throughout the world, as well as the effects of different 
democratic arrangements on policy outcomes and on 
democratic success and failure.  
 
PSCI199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
 
PSCI203.  Introduction to Public Administration (3). 
This course is intended to introduce students to the field of 
public administration.  It will provide an overview of the 
theories and practices of governmental administration, 
discuss both traditional and emerging public sector 
management issues, and explore the role of administrators 
in the development and implementation of public policy.  
(Prerequisite: PSCI101). 
 
PSCI205.  Introduction to Public Policy (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
The public policy process is the heart of politics, where 
decisions are made about who gets taxed, who gets that 
money, and who determines what rules we have to live by. 
Investigates how policy is made, who the players are, and 
the effects of different types of policies. Open to freshmen. 
Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI206.  Global Health Policy (1). 
This course provides students with knowledge about health 
care policy, or lack of, in a selected less-developed country, 
prepares students with basic knowledge of that country, and 
culminates in an approximately 10-day service learning trip 
to the selected country during the winter break  Open to 
freshman  Fall. 
 
PSCI210.  Career Seminar (1).  
Discusses post-graduate and career opportunities for 
Political Science students. Fall. 
 
PSCI240.  Political Theory (3) (SOCIAL SCIENCE). 
Survey of selected texts from the history of political thought. 
May be repeated with different topics. Open to freshmen.  
 
 
PSCI245.  Environmental Politics (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
Considers the problems of humans’ effect on the 
environment and political responses to it.  Different 
approaches to environmentalism are considered, and 
Course Descriptions 
 
255 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
different environmental problems analyzed. 
 
PSCI250.  United States Foreign Policy (3)  
(SOCIAL SCIENCE).  
How foreign policy is made; how and why the U.S. has been 
involved in recent world affairs, including trade, foreign aid, 
alliances, diplomacy, terrorism, wars and revolutions, and 
arms control. Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI273.  Nuclear Weapons & Power (2). 
The science and politics of nuclear weapons and nuclear 
power, including the discovery of the atom, the Manhattan 
Project, the Cold War arms race, the prospects for nuclear 
terrorism, and the controversies over nuclear power and 
nuclear waste disposal. Students who have taken CHEM273 
may not take this course for credit. (Prerequisite: CCC101). 
Open to freshmen. Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI285.  Congress & Presidents (3). 
The mixed adversarial and cooperative relationship between 
Congress and Presidents, the motivations of legislators and 
executives, and the shifting of power from the legislative to 
the executive branch.   (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI course).  
Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI290.  Significant Books (1-2). 
Close reading of significant books in political science 
Each offering of this course focuses on a single book and 
associate readings  May be repeated for credit with 
different topics. 
 
PSCI295.  Research Methods for Political Science (3).  
Introduction to the methods used for empirical research in 
Political Science. Open to freshmen.   
 
PSCI299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
PSCI301.  Special Topics in Political Science (1-3).     
May be repeated with different topic. (Prerequisite: one 
prior PSCI course). 
 
PSCI302.  Belize Field Experience (3)  
(NON-WESTERN). 
Focused study of the historical, geographical, and political 
forces shaping a multi-ethnic democracy in the developing 
world. Course fee covers a spring break trip to Belize. 
(Prerequisite: permission of instructor).  
 
PSCI303.  State and Local Government  
Administration (3). 
This course provides students with an understanding of the  
structure and function of state and local governments in the 
United States.  Students will explore local and state-level 
policy issues and administrative processes.  They will also 
explore urban issues in the United State and discuss 
solutions to all of these challenges.  (Prerequisite: PSCI203). 
 
PSCI304.  Public Budgeting and Finance (3). 
This course covers fiscal and budgetary policies and 
practices in public sector and governmental organizations.  
Students will improve their understanding of revenue, 
expenditure, deficit spending, and debt, specifically as they 
relate to government.  The will also examine the functions 
of accounting in the public sector and learn to create 
financial reports.  (Prerequisites: ACCT203, PSCI203 and 
PSCI205). 
 
PSCI305.  Political Economy (3).  
Analysis of government from an economic perspective 
through the lens of public choice theory, with emphasis on 
rent-seeking behavior, market distorting effects of 
government regulation and inefficiencies in collective 
decision-making. Students who have taken ECON305 may 
not take this course for credit. (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI 
or ECON course). Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI315.  Globalization (3).  
The structure and effects of global economic, political, and 
cultural integration, and the mechanisms of international 
governance. Students who have taken ECON315 may not 
take this course for credit. (Prerequisite: One prior PSCI or 
ECON course). Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI328.  Politics in the Third World (3)  
(NON-WESTERN). 
 Politics and problems of selected third world countries in 
Asia, Africa and Latin America and their relations with the 
United States and the rest of the world. (Prerequisite: one 
prior PSCI course.). Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI331.  Campaigns & Elections (3). 
Examines the nature of elections in American politics, 
including techniques for running a successful political 
campaign. (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI course.) Offered as 
needed. 
 
PSCI351.  European Politics (3).  
Examines the political institutions, culture, history and 
problems of selected European countries and the European 
Union, as well as their relations with the United States and 
the rest of the world. (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI course).  
Offered as needed. 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
256 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
PSCI352.  Central & East European Politics (3) 
(NON-WESTERN). 
History and politics of Central and Eastern Europe from its 
origins as a distinct region through the end of communism 
and the eastward expansion of the European Union and 
NATO. (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI course). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PSCI370.  Democratization (3).    
Examines the processes by which authoritarian regimes 
become democratic, as well as current understandings of 
why some democratic transitions are more successful than 
others, by examining a number of historical and 
contemporary cases from around the world. (Prerequisite: 
one prior PSCI course). Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI380.  Democratic Theory (3). 
A survey of ancient and modern theories of democracy, 
addressing issues such as the nature of democracy, liberty, 
equality, representation, majority rule, and citizenship, as 
well as major criticisms of democracy and current issues in 
democratic theory. (Prerequisite: one prior PSCI course). 
Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI396.  Constitutional Law I: Powers Of  
Government (3).  
Study of U.S. Supreme Court decisions that resolve 
struggles for power between the three branches of the federal 
government and between the federal and state governments. 
Consideration of such issues as the government’s authority 
to regulate drugs, the president’s commander-in-chief 
powers and the distinctions between federal and state court 
cases. Students who have taken SCJ396 may not take this 
course for credit. (Prerequisite: junior standing). Offered as 
needed. 
 
 
PSCI397.  Constitutional Law II:  Individual  
Liberties (3).   
Study of U.S. Supreme Court decisions that determine the 
extent to which individual liberties are protected under the 
U.S. Constitution, with special attention given to civil rights 
issues. Will include explorations of the constitutional rights 
to due process, equal protection, to keep and bear arms and 
other issues. Students who have taken SCJ397 may not take 
this course for credit. (Prerequisite: junior standing). 
Offered as needed. 
 
 
PSCI399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
 
 
PSCI405.  Strategic Behavior (3).  
Study of strategic decision-making in politics and everyday 
life, including applications to business. (Prerequisite: one 
prior PSCI or ECON course). Offered as needed. 
 
PSCI409.  Capstone: Research Seminar (3).  
Culminating experience for political science majors. 
Students will select a research topic, review the published 
literature on that topic, prepare a research proposal, 
conduct the research, and present their findings publicly. 
Important writings in the discipline may be assigned 
(Prerequisites: PSCI295,  MATH204 or PSYC211 and 
junior or senior standing) Fall. 
 
PSCI410.  Public Administration Capstone (3). 
This capstone is the culmination for Public Administration 
majors and should be taken as the final course in a 
student’s studies for the major.  It is intended to synthesize 
all of a student’s learnings in the field into one public-
sector organization, such as a non-profit, or their local 
government.  (Prerequisites: PSCI303, PSCI304, and 
MATH204 or PSYC211.  Junior standing required). 
 
PSCI451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Supervised reading, research or work in an area of special 
interest to the student. (Prerequisite: Written departmental 
permission.) Fall, Spring, May, Summer. 
 
 
 
 
 
PSCI499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
Courses in Psychology (PSYC) 
 
 
PSYC100.  General Psychology (3)(SOCIAL 
SCIENCE).  
An overview of the facts, principles and methods of the 
science of behavior and psychological processes. Topics 
typically include learning, research methodology, memory, 
perception, cognition, psychobiology, social psychology, 
abnormal behavior and psychotherapy. Students may be 
required to participate in a limited number of experiments 
conducted by faculty members or advanced students (or to 
complete an alternative assignment). Fall,  
 
PSYC199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: junior or senior standing and written 
departmental permission). 
 
PSYC205.  Developmental Psychology (3).  
Course Descriptions 
 
257 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Theory and research on psychological development from 
birth through adulthood. (Prerequisite: A “C” or better in 
PSYC100) Open to freshmen  Fall.  
 
PSYC206.  Health Psychology (3).  
Behavioral factors in health and illness. Topics typically 
include stress, prevention of illness, pain and patient-
practitioner interaction. Applications are made to specific 
illnesses. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC100).  Open to 
freshmen. Fall. 
 
PSYC211.  Statistics for Psychology (4).  
The study of descriptive and inferential statistics as applied 
to psychological data. Topics include measures of central 
tendency and variability, t-tests, ANOVA, and regression. 
Three hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week  
(Prerequisites: C or better in PSYC100 and MATH101 or 
equivalent proficiency).  Fall,  
 
 
PSYC212.  Research Methods for Non-Majors (4).  
An introduction to the principles of psychological research 
with an emphasis on how to evaluate claims about human 
behavior.  This course CANNOT be used toward a major in 
psychology. Three hours of lecture, one hour of laboratory 
per week. (Prerequisite: PSYC100 and completion of 6 
semester hours in PSYC).  
 
PSYC214.  Social Psychology (3).  
Individual behavior as it is influenced by the behavior of 
others within a variety of social contexts. Topics typically 
include 
affiliation, 
attitude 
and 
behavior 
change, 
interpersonal attraction, social influence, prosocial behavior 
and aggression. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC100). 
Offered as needed. 
 
PSYC216.  Human Sexuality (3).  
The physiological, psychological and social dimensions of 
sexual development and behavior.  (This course does 
not count toward the major or minor in Psychology). Offered 
as needed. 
  
PSYC218.  Stigma, Mental Health & Film (3).  
What is social stigma, and how have psychological disorders 
been stigmatized?  The course will explore mental health 
stigma primarily through film/movies, but also through 
other media (e.g., newsprint, music and television).  
(Prerequisite: PSYC100). 
 
PSYC265.  Research Methods for Majors (4).  
An introduction to the scientific method in behavioral 
science. Includes scientific thinking, research design, and 
APA-style manuscript format. Students will also critically 
evaluate scientific evidence, collect and analyze data, and 
write research reports. Three hours of lecture, one hour of 
laboratory per week. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC211). 
Fall,  
 
PSYC299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
PSYC300.  Topics in Psychology (1-3).  
An in-depth study of a special topic, which varies from 
semester to semester. Recent courses have focused on 
current 
psychotherapies, 
forensic 
psychology, 
and 
psychology in the cinema. May be repeated with a different 
topic. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC100). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PSYC303.  Abnormal Psychology (4).  
The study of behavioral and emotional disturbance.  Current 
research and theory are applied to the description, 
assessment, causes and treatment of psychopathology.  
Service learning project at an agency as part of the lab.  
Three hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week. 
(Prerequisite:  C or better in PSYC100).  
 
PSYC304.  Theories & Principles of Psychotherapy (3).  
The nature of counseling and psychotherapy, with an 
emphasis on dominant theories, research, current practice 
and ethics. The basic counseling skills of empathy and 
listening are covered. (Prerequisite: C or better in 
PSYC303). Offered as needed. 
 
PSYC305.  Child Psychopathology (3). 
An overview of psychopathology in children and 
adolescents.  Areas to be explored include the DSM criteria, 
assessment, etiology, and treatment of various psychological 
disorders.  An emphasis will be placed on empirical research 
in these areas. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC205).  
Offered as needed. 
 
PSYC306.  Psychology of Gender (3).  
Explores theories and research regarding the roots and 
impact of sex and gender. Typically covered are the effects 
of being female and male on personality, relationships, 
achievement, health, mental health and social life. 
(Prerequisite:  C or better in PSYC100).  Offered as needed. 
 
PSYC311.  Personality Theory & Research (3).  
An 
examination 
of 
various 
approaches 
toward 
understanding personality including Freudian, humanistic, 
trait, behavioral/social learning and cognitive. The research 
generated by each of the theories will also be examined. 
(Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC100). Offered as needed. 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
258 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
PSYC313.  Cognitive Psychology (3).  
The study of cognitive processes. Topics include perception, 
attention, memory, problem solving, reasoning, and 
language. (Prerequisite: C or better in PSYC100).  
 
PSYC321  Psychology & Law (3). 
Psychological principles drawn from sub-disciplines (e.g., 
social, clinical, cognitive) in terms of their relevance and 
application to the legal system.  Topics will include forensic 
psychologists’ roles, problems in the field, techniques of 
criminal 
investigation; 
insanity 
and 
competency; 
dangerousness/risk assessment; eyewitness identification; 
interrogations and confessions, and child sexual abuse. 
(Prerequisites: C or better in PSYC100 and junior or senior 
standing). Fall. 
 
PSYC322.  Learning Theory (3).  
An examination of research findings in the area of learning.  
Attention is directed to basic and applied behavioral results 
using animal and human subjects.  There will be an emphasis 
on practical applications. (Prerequisite: completion of 9 
semester hours in PSYC). Offered as needed. 
 
 
PSYC325.  Ethics in Psychology (2).  
Explores the psychology ethics code and dilemmas.  Topics 
include confidentiality, multiple relationships, assessment, 
therapy, and research.  Also considered are the effects of 
managed care and laws on professional practice. 
(Prerequisite: PSYC100). 
 
PSYC329.  History of Psychology (3).  
An examination of the philosophical and scientific concepts 
important to the development of psychology through the 
work and biographies of historically significant contributors 
to the field. (Prerequisites: PHIL101 and completion of 12 
semester hours in PSYC).  
 
 
 
 
PSYC341.  Biopsychology (3).  
Biological bases of behavior, including topics such as basic 
neuroanatomy, neural transmission, sensory transduction, 
genetics, 
emotion, 
sleep, 
learning, 
language, 
and 
psychological disorders. (Prerequisites: C or better in 
PSYC100, and 3 additional hours in PSYC). Offered as 
needed. 
 
PSYC348.  Industrial/Organizational Psychology (3).  
The application of psychological theories and research to 
problems associated with the world of work. Topics 
typically include research methodology, motivation, job 
satisfaction, personnel selection and placement, and 
leadership. 
Co-listed 
as 
MGMT348. 
(Prerequisite: 
PSYC100). Offered as needed. 
 
PSYC399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
(Prerequisite: junior or senior standing and written 
departmental permission). 
 
PSYC444.  Advanced Research (2). 
Capstone preparatory course. Under supervision of a faculty 
member, each student chooses a research topic of interest, 
conducts an in-depth literature review, 
formulates 
hypotheses and predictions, designs an experiment, obtains 
IRB approval, and prepares a formal research proposal. 
Proposed research will be conducted in PSYC445.  
(Prerequisites: C or better in PSYC265 and junior standing 
or permission of department.)  
 
PSYC445.  Capstone: Senior Research (2).  
Under supervision of a faculty member, each student  
prepares an experiment, conducts a pilot study, conducts 
the research, and analyzes the data based on their 
hypotheses. Each student prepares a research report 
following APA publication guidelines and presents the 
findings in a public form.  (Prerequisites: C or better in 
PSYC444, senior standing and permission of department). 
Fall. 
 
PSYC451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
Supervised reading or research in an area of special interest 
to the student; the project may be theoretical or 
experimental. (Prerequisites: PSYC100 and permission of 
instructor). 
 
 
PSYC499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Religion (RELG) 
 
RELG101.  Bible and Culture (3) 
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
An introduction to the literary, historical, and theological 
dimensions of the Bible, and to the methods and theories of 
biblical criticism, with emphasis on the role of the reader in 
the creation of meaning, and on the relationship of the Bible 
to contemporary social issues. Fall. 
 
RELG102.  Religions of the West (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
Survey of major monotheistic traditions in the West: 
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Emphasis on the major 
forms of these three faiths including Traditional and Reform 
Course Descriptions 
 
259 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Judaism, Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Protestant 
Christianity, and Sunni and Shiite Islam. Attention will be 
given to historical origins, daily practices and holidays, and 
contemporary issues. Fall. 
 
RELG105.  Religions of the East (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN).  
An introduction to the major religions of Asia: Hinduism, 
Jainim, Sikhism, and Theravada Buddhism from South 
Asia; Daoism, Confucianism, Mahayana and Vajrayana 
Buddhism, and Shinto from East Asia. Offered as needed. 
 
RELG106.  Religions in America (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).   
A survey of the religious dimension of American history and 
its influence in shaping American national identity.  
Emphasis on how important historical movement provide 
the background for understanding and interpreting 
contemporary American culture. 
 
RELG108.  Introduction to Religion: Myth, Ritual &  
Symbol (3) (PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION,  
NON-WESTERN).  
An exploration of the world’s dominant religious and 
secular worldviews focusing on the myths, rituals and 
symbols contained in their sacred texts. The material is 
divided equally between Western and Eastern religions. 
Fall. 
 
RELG112.  Ancient Greek & Roman Mythology (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN). 
A study of Greco-Roman religion reflected in the works of 
Homer, Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns, Pindar, Aeschylus, 
Sophocles, Euripides, Herodotus, Plato, Lucian, Lucretius, 
Vergil, Ovid, and Seneca, emphasizing myth as a 
fundamental category of religious discourse, and a mode of 
social , cultural, and ideological expression.  
 
RELG114.  Christian Social Ethics (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
Contemporary social problems and their relationship to 
Christianity. Attention given to the historical development 
of various Christian approaches to social issues, 
emphasizing current social engagement. Fall. 
 
 
RELG199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
 
RELG207.  Islam (3) (PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION,  
NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to Islam.  The course makes extensive use 
of the Qur’an and Hadith in order to develop an 
understanding at the primary source level.  Using the 
historical development of Islam as a base, the course moves 
to examine Islamic belief and practice and, then, its 
expression in the modern world. 
 
RELG210.  World  Christianities (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
Study of the contemporary situation of the Christian 
tradition worldwide. Focus on Christianity in discrete 
geographical areas, and the diversity and richness of 
Christian cultures. Areas of study include Eastern 
Orthodoxy, Christianity in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
the rise of Pentecostalism, and Christians in relation to other 
religious traditions.  
 
RELG212.  Jesus in Mass Production (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN).    
A wide-ranging exploration into the many faces of the figure 
of Jesus, through a variety of genres and media.  In addition 
to the New Testament writings and other early Christian 
literature, the course engages multiple interpretations in 
novels, film, art, pop culture, and other contexts, including 
perspectives from outside the United States.  
 
 
RELG216.  Religion on Film (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION).  
Exploration of the religious issues reflected in popular films, 
with special attention on the relationship between beliefs, 
practices, and media.   
 
RELG218.  Drugs & Religious Experience (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN).  
An exploration of the ritual use of hallucinogenic drugs in 
sacred culture. The central issue of the course is the 
relationship between such drugs and religious experience 
Examples are taken from various traditions from the 
Americas and Asia. May Term only. 
 
RELG299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
RELG300.  Topics in Religion (1-3).  
A special topic or topics, including specific religions or the 
relation of religion to other aspects of life. (Prerequisite: one 
course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG301.  Philosophy of Religion (3).  
An inquiry into the scope and function of religion, the nature 
and destiny of human beings, the existence and nature of 
God and other selected problems.  Cross-listed with 
PHIL301.  (Students who have taken PHIL301 for credit 
may not take RELG301 for credit).  (Prerequisite: one 
course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
Course Descriptions 
 
260 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
RELG303.  Literature of the Hebrew Bible (3).  
In-depth exploration of the scriptures shared by Jews and 
Christians, with detailed study of select passages, attending 
particularly to the characteristic diversity of these texts, to 
the historical and contemporary cultures that surround them, 
and to the relationship between methodological perspectives 
and interpretative issues. (Prerequisite: RELG101).  Offered 
as needed. 
 
RELG304.  New Testament Writings (3).  
In-depth exploration of the scriptures unique to Christianity, 
with detailed study of select passages, attending particularly 
to the characteristic diversity of these texts, the historical 
and contemporary cultures that surround them.  Their 
relationship to early Christianity and the figure of Jesus, and 
methodological questions central to their interpretation.  
(Prerequisite: RELG101).   
 
RELG306.  Issues in American Religious History (3).  
Specific issues and movements in American religion and 
their interrelationships with the larger American culture. 
Special attention is placed on the impact of these issues and 
movements on the contemporary situation. Topics include 
social Christianity, fundamentalism and Pentecostalism, 
civil religion, church and state, sects and cults and 
denominational history. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG308.  Native American Sacred Traditions (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN).  
An introduction to the worldviews and sacred traditions 
which form the basis of American Indian social, political, 
economic and material structures. Emphasis is on the 
intrinsic relationship between religion and culture in 
American Indian societies. A variety of cultures are 
examined, including tribes from the Great Lakes, Plains and 
Southwest. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). 
 
RELG309.  Sports and Religion (3). 
Understanding sport as a religious phenomenon.  Studying 
the interconnections between sports and religion provides an 
entrée into larger issues of society, ritual and the sociology 
of religion using case studies.  Offered once a year. 
 
RELG310.  Women in World Religions (3) 
(NON-WESTERN).  
Themes and issues in the traditions and texts of Buddhist, 
Hindu, Jewish, Christian and Muslim religions with 
particular attention to the role of women. Topics will 
include: images of women in sacred scriptures and historical 
traditions, ritual practices, sources of religious authority, and 
psychological and ethical implications of 
feminist 
approaches to religion. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG311.  African Religious Tradition (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN). 
An introduction to sub-Saharan indigenous African 
religions.  The focus is tribal and area specific with 
particular attention to religious practices, beliefs, ethics, and 
worldviews. Offered once a year. 
 
RELG315.  Buddhism (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN). 
An examination of Buddhism as a major religion in South 
and East Asia focusing on its core concepts, beliefs, and 
practices giving attention to its major divisions (Theravada, 
Mahayana, and Vajrayana) and the most important schools 
within those traditions. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG319.  The Origins of Protestantism (3).    
Principal figures and religious, political, social, and 
economic factors that contributed to the development of 
Protestantism from the 16th through the 18th centuries. 
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as 
needed. 
 
RELG328.  Liberation Theology (3).    
During the 20th Century a number of movements within 
Christianity turned to the teachings of Jesus and Hebrew 
prophets, and Marxist social analysis, to argue and work for 
social justice. Examines the origins of Liberation Theology 
in Latin America in the 1960s and the Black Power struggle 
in the U.S. Other topics include Feminist, Womanist, 
Ecological and Gay/Lesbian liberation theologies.  Cross-
listed with PHIL328.  Students who have taken RELG328 
for credit may not take PHIL328 for credit. (Prerequisite: 
one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG330.  Advanced Studies in Bible (3).  
In-depth study of selected texts, themes, or topics in or 
pertaining to the Jewish and/or Christian scriptures and/or 
relevant extra-biblical literature.  Emphasis is on matters of 
theory and method, both historical and literary.  Repeatable 
with different topics.  (Prerequisite: RELG101).  Fall. 
 
RELG332.  Women in the Bible (3).  
What does the Bible have to say about women?  This course 
examines the portrayal of women in the Bible, and the 
significance of that portrayal in contemporary society.  The 
focus of the course is on texts from the Bible which feature 
women.  However, sources from outside the Bible are 
discussed. (Prerequisite:  One class in PHIL or RELG). 
Offered as needed. 
Course Descriptions 
 
261 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
 
RELG335.  Japanese Religion (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON-WESTERN).  
An examination of the interrelation- ship between the 
dominant religious traditions of Japan and the ways in which 
people express those traditions culturally. The emphasis is 
on the cultural dimension of Shinto, Buddhism, and 
Confucianism and their historical interactions. Offered as 
needed. 
 
RELG340.  Religion & Environmental Ethics (3).   
Examines whether the Judeo-Christian traditions can 
provide rationales that will  persuade  human  beings  from  
destroying other species, their habitats and the greater 
biosphere of our planet.  We will examine Judeo-Christian 
texts and discern the extent to which they provide promising 
foundations for environmental ethics. (Prerequisite: one 
course in PHIL or RELG). Fall. 
 
RELG345.  Chinese Religion (3)  
(PHILOSOPHY/RELIGION, NON- WESTERN).   
An examination of the interrelationship between the 
dominant religious traditions of China and the ways in 
which people express those traditions culturally. The 
emphasis is on the cultural dimension of Daoism, Buddhism, 
and Confucianism and their historical interactions. 
(Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). Offered as 
needed. 
 
RELG352.  Christian Heresies & Orthodoxies (3).  
Development of Christian theology from Jewish and 
Hellenic thought. Focus on major leaders, thinkers, and 
movements during this time. Emphasis on Augustine, 
Pseudo-Dionysius, 
and 
Aquinas. 
Cross-listed 
with 
PHIL352.  (Students who have taken RELG352 for credit 
may not take PHIL352 for credit). (Prerequisite: one course 
in PHIL or RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
 
RELG354.  19th & 20th-Century Christian 
Theology (3).  
Continental Theology from Schleiermacher and Hegel to the 
present. Will include dialectical thinkers, existentialists, 
feminists, and liberationists. Cross-listed with PHIL354.  
Students who have taken RELG354 for credit may not take 
PHIL354 for credit. (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or 
RELG). Offered as needed. 
 
RELG366.  Leadership & Religious Views (3). 
The course studies how political, cultural and other leaders 
draw on, or influence their religious traditions.  The course 
includes the examination of Martin Luther, Asa Mahan, 
Jesus, Paul, John, Wesley, and Martin Luther King Jr 
among others Offered as needed. 
 
RELG385.  Ancient Fiction (3).   
Examines the history, place, culture, readership, and literary 
dynamics of select Greek, Latin, Jewish, and early Christian 
novelistic literature from the first four centuries of the 
Common Era. Emphasizes matters of theory and method in 
relation to interpretation, and considers the relationship of 
prose fiction to various issues of identity, power and 
epistemology.  (Prerequisite: one course in PHIL or RELG). 
Offered as needed. 
 
RELG399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
RELG400.  Capstone: Senior Research Project (3). 
A special project stressing the application of research skills 
and the synthesis of knowledge in the discipline(s) of 
philosophy and/or religion. 
 
RELG451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: departmental permission). 
 
RELG499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Criminal Justice (SCJ) 
 
SCJ199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
An observational internship providing opportunities to gain 
relevant career experiences and information in the fields of 
sociology and criminal justice. Open to second-semester 
freshmen and above. 
 
SCJ225.  Introduction to Criminal & Juvenile 
Justice (3).  
A sociological approach to prevention as justice, followed 
by an introduction to topics such as the U.S. legislative and 
legal system, crime, politics, and the media, police, courts, 
probation, corrections, parole and prisoner reentry as 
applied to both adults and juveniles (Prerequisite: SOC104; 
course can also be taken as a co-requisite with SOC104). 
Fall. 
 
SCJ266.  Juvenile, Justice and Delinquency (3).  
Research 
on 
child 
development, 
family, 
school, 
neighborhoods, peers, and drug abuse as relates to 
criminology of youth crime. Introduction to the juvenile 
justice system, including teen court, juvenile probation, 
juvenile detention, residential treatment and aftercare for 
adjudicated youth. (Co-requisite: SCJ225). Fall. 
 
SCJ267.  Criminal Investigation & Forensics (3).  
Course Descriptions 
 
262 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Introduces aspects of police work involving investigative 
techniques, protecting and reconstructing the crime scene 
and use of natural and social sciences in gathering and 
analyzing evidence, and in preparing presentation for court. 
(Prerequisite: SCJ225).  
 
SCJ299.  Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
SCJ301.  Federal Law Enforcement Careers (3). 
Survey of criminal justice occupations in the federal system, 
including positions in homeland security, law enforcement, 
corrections and the judiciary.  This course will explore the 
roles those holding these occupations play within their 
respective institutions and the federal system as a whole.  
(Prerequisite: SCJ225). Offered as needed. 
 
SCJ308.  Sex Discrimination and Violence Against  
Women (3). 
Explores how legal and social institutions handle issues of 
sex and gender-based discrimination and violence.  These 
issues include:  sexual harassment, sexual assault, domestic 
violence, and workplace discrimination.  Examines 
patriarchy, prejudice and stereotyping.  (Prerequisites: 
SCJ225 and SOC104).   
 
SCJ351.  Selected Topics in Criminal Justice (2-4).  
Topics of interest to faculty and students, may include 
juvenile treatment, domestic violence and batterers 
treatment; probation, prison, and parole; women and crime; 
federal law enforcement and public administration; stress 
and crime. Offered as needed. 
 
SCJ360.  Criminology & Prevention (3).  
Introduction to major criminological theories and research, 
including fieldwork insights from criminals, prisoner 
stories, and ex-con academic criminologists. Application of 
criminological theory to design of crime prevention 
programs. (Prerequisite: SCJ225). Fall. 
 
SCJ361.  Police & Urban Society (3).  
Issues in urban policing, including the history, organization, 
roles and styles of policing, the police subculture, patrol and 
investigative duties, community relations, discretion, 
corruption and accountability. (Prerequisite: SCJ225). 
 
 
SCJ363.  Corrections & Rehabilitation (3).  
Introduces treatment and therapy modalities used in 
residential treatment for adjudicated youth, and in adult 
corrections. Exposure to U.S. prison system use of mass 
incarceration, roles of probation and parole, and reentry 
issues. (Prerequisite: SCJ225).  Fall. 
  
SCJ364.  Drugs in American Society (3).  
The history of drug use in the U.S.; types of drugs and their 
effects; medical and health perspectives; social control and 
legal aspects of drug use; the “legalization” debate; the 
social consequences of drug use; the period of the “war on 
drugs” and its effectiveness. Drug policy in the criminal 
justice system. (Prerequisite: SOC104). Offered as needed. 
 
SCJ366.  Criminal Law (3).  
Introduces first year law school and the American Court 
system, with focus on criminal law. Defense attorney’s role, 
burdens of proof, forms of evidence, criminal evidence and 
legal reasoning. Introductory research skills for briefing a 
case. (Prerequisite: junior standing). Fall. 
 
SCJ393.  Criminal Procedure & the Courts (3). 
Focuses on constitutional rights of criminal suspects and 
defendants during the investigation and litigation process.  
Explores structures and procedures within state and federal 
trial and appellate courts. Attention is given to the role of 
participants, relevant substantive and procedural law, 
implications of court decisions. (Prerequisite: SCJ225). 
 
 
SCJ396.  Constitutional Law I: Powers of  
Government (3). 
Study of U.S. Supreme Court decisions that resolve 
struggles for power between the three branches of 
government and between the federal and state governments. 
Consideration of such issues as the government’s authority 
to regulate drugs, the president’s commander-in-chief 
powers and the distinctions between federal and state court 
cases. Cross-listed with PSCI396.  Students who are taking 
PSCI396 may not take this course for credit.  (Prerequisite: 
junior standing). Offered as needed. 
 
 
SCJ397.  Constitutional Law II: Individual  
Liberties (3). 
Study of U.S. Supreme Court decisions that determine the 
extent to which individual liberties are protected under the 
U.S. Constitution, with special attention given to civil rights 
issues. Will include explorations of the constitutional rights 
to due process, equal protection, to keep and bear arms and 
other issues.  Cross-listed with PSCI397 Students who are 
taking PSCI397 may not take this course for credit. 
(Prerequisite: junior standing). Offered as needed. 
 
SCJ399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
Students have the opportunity to participate in field projects 
or work with professional staff members in organizations 
such as police and sheriff’s departments, courts, probation 
departments, 
juvenile 
centers, 
correction 
facilities, 
Course Descriptions 
 
263 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
prevention agencies, community organizations and human 
service organizations. Open to juniors and seniors. 
 
SCJ400.  Freedom of Expression & Crime (3). 
Uses major Supreme Court cases and other materials to 
explore the First Amendment rights of those who have been 
accused of crimes. Will include the study of the 
philosophical and legal history of freedom of expression. 
Will especially focus on how courts have sought to balance 
the constitutional right to freedom of expression with other 
important social interests. (Prerequisite: junior standing)
Offered as needed.  
 
SCJ402.   Wrongful Conviction Seminar (3). 
Explores how defects within the criminal investigation and 
adjudication 
processes, 
including 
false 
confessions, 
eyewitness misidentification, inadequate counsel, and 
others, can result in the conviction and punishment of 
innocent defendants.  (Prerequisite: junior standing) Fall.
 
SCJ403.  Death Penalty Seminar (3).  
Focuses on legal, historical, and philosophical issues related 
to capital punishment in the U.S. Special attention will be 
given to the processes by which criminal defendants are 
sentenced to death. (Prerequisite: junior standing). Offered 
every other   
 
SCJ404.  Issues in Homeland Security (3). 
Focuses on national security agencies and issues, including 
cyber-crimes and terrorism.  Special emphasis will be given 
to understanding the creation and operations of the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security (Prerequisite: SCJ225). 
Fall. 
 
SCJ405.  Issues in Prison Reform (3). 
Explores controversial and topical issues in U.S. prisons.  
Special focus is given to exposing problems and studying 
proposed solutions regarding the quality and functionality of 
correctional institutions. (Prerequisite: SCJ225). Fall. 
 
 SCJ451.  Independent Study (1-4).  
Supervised reading and research in sociology, criminal 
justice.. (Prerequisite: permission of department).  
 
SCJ499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
Courses in Business-  
Sport Management (SMGT) 
 
SMGT100.  Introduction to Sport Management (3). 
Introduction to academic and professional field of sports 
management.  Develops a framework for understanding the 
business of sport including an in-depth analysis of the sport 
and sport-related industries; emphasis given to applying the 
rational decision making model in the manager’s planning, 
organizing, leading, controlling decisions.  Includes 
exploration of career opportunities. Previously listed as 
SMGT261. 
 
SMGT101.  Introduction to eSports Management (3). 
Students will navigate the structure of eSports leagues, 
teams, players, gaming publishers, tournament operators, 
media and affiliate organizations.  Students will learn 
baseline skills in eSports streaming, broadcasting, 
marketing, and public relations. 
 
SMGT111.  Introduction to Games (3). 
Games sit at the intersection of technology, art, and culture, 
and this course will explore all three elements, as well as the 
role games play in society, and the industry that produces 
them. The basics of gaming development will also be 
explored. This course was developed in partnership with 
Unity and the IGDA. 
 
SMGT199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3). 
 
SMGT231.  Sport History (3). 
This course examines the history of sports.  Students will 
explore how athletic activities were transformed into 
spectator sports at the collegiate and professional level, and 
how sports reflected and informed issues such as race, class, 
and gender.  (Prerequisite: SMGT101). 
 
SMGT299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
SMGT301.  Distribution of Games (3). 
The role of a publisher in the games industry is to ensure that 
a game can get in front of its audience successfully. To do 
that, a publisher must consider a variety of distribution 
strategies and channels. This course will teach how 
publishers promote games and bring them to market. By the 
end of this class, students will be able to plan a game’s 
launch and promotion. (Prerequisite: MGMT230 & 
SMGT111) 
 
SMGT350.  Topics in Sports Management (3).  
In-depth theoretical and practical coverage of concepts in a 
specialized area of business administration, using the 
conceptual knowledge for planning and problem solving. 
Topics may include but are not limited to new product 
development, managing information, ethical considerations 
in decision making and cross-cultural business negotiations. 
May be repeated with a different topic (Prerequisite: 
permission of instructor) Offered as needed  Previously 
listed as B AD350. 
 
SMGT362.  Sports Marketing (3). 
Application of marketing principles to sports, sports events, 
and sports products.  Use of marketing strategies and 
techniques including public relations, sales, promotions and 
advertising for sports.  Emphasis includes; sports as a 
marketing tool for other products, marketing of sports 
products; and emerging considerations in the sports 
marketing field. (Prerequisite: MKTG230).  Previously 
listed as  
B AD362. 
 
SMGT364.  Facility Planning & Management (3). 
Explores the competencies necessary to manage and operate 
sport and other public event facilities.  Topics include 
facility design, scheduling, security and supervision, 
housekeeping 
and 
maintenance, 
concessions 
and 
merchandise, risk management and insurance.  Includes 
conceptual and technical aspects related to developing and 
operating sport-related events. (Prerequisite: MGMT243).  
Previously listed as B AD364.  
 
SMGT369.  Professional Sports Management  
Internship (3). 
Professional internship in sports management field 
involving direct experience in the management of; a sport 
facility, sports team, sports information for team/franchise, 
or marketing activities for team/ franchise, or front-office 
experience.  Internship experiences that include a significant 
coaching component do not qualify for credit in this degree 
program. 
(Prerequisite: 
junior 
or 
senior 
standing).   
Previously listed as B AD369. 
 
SMGT375.  Sport in Film (3). 
This course will critically examine visual representations of 
sport in popular culture. Particular attention will be paid to 
how media, as a form of popular culture, is produced, 
represented and, ultimately, consumed. Moreover, the 
course will examine how dominant ideologies are often 
perpetuated and, perhaps, resisted in and through a variety 
of visual forms. 
 
SMGT399.  Professional Internship (1-12). 
 
SMGT451.  Independent Study (1-3).  
(Prerequisite: permission of Business Department). 
 
SMGT463.  Legal & Ethical Issues in Sport (3). 
Survey of the legal and ethical issues in the sports industry.  
Topics may include negligence; liability; violence/crowd 
control; product liability; risk management; contracts; labor 
agreements; antitrust; gender equity.  Explores and analyzes 
specific legal and ethical dilemmas. (Prerequisite: junior 
standing).  Previously listed as B AD363. 
SMGT499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
 
Courses in Sociology (SOC) 
 
SOC104.  Introduction to Sociology (3) (SOCIAL 
SCIENCE). 
The patterns of relationships among individuals, groups, 
organizations and social institutions in society. Students are 
introduced to different sociological perspectives and 
methodologies used in understanding social life. Fall, 
 
 
SOC199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
An observational internship providing opportunities to gain 
relevant career experiences and information in the fields of 
sociology and criminal justice. Open to second-semester 
freshmen and above. 
 
 
SOC201.  Social Problems (3).   
The nature, causes and attempted solutions to various 
American social problems are examined; these may include 
deviance, poverty, family violence, various forms of 
discrimination, health issues and environmental hazards. 
(Prerequisite: SOC104).  Offered as needed. 
 
SOC202.  Sociology of Sex & Gender (3).  
A sociological analysis of gender construction and sexual 
inequality, including an introduction to general historical 
knowledge about men’s and  women’s  lives, social forces  
affecting  reproduction, sexuality, intimacy, parenthood and 
gender role patterns. Fall. 
 
SOC299.  Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
 
  
SOC303.  Race and Ethnic Relations (3). 
A sociological analysis of the concepts of race and ethnicity 
both in the United States and around the world. Special 
emphasis placed on relationships between ethnic groups and 
solutions to problems associated with race and ethnicity. 
(Prerequisite: junior standing). Fall. 
 
SOC307.   Marriage and the Family (3).   
Topics include the development of marriage and the family 
in their various forms up to the present; consideration of 
contemporary marriage patterns and relationships; family 
disorganization and reorganization; and the effects of social 
change on marriage and the family. (Prerequisite: SOC104). 
Fall 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
265 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
SOC309.  Urban Sociology (3).  
Topics include types of communities; factors influencing 
urban growth and development in world regions and in the 
U.S.; demographic trends and ecological factors; urban 
planning and redevelopment; community agencies and 
services; social problems associated with urban life; and 
forms of interaction emanating from urban structures. 
(Prerequisite: SOC104). Fall. 
 
SOC311.  Class, Status and Power (3).  
Who gets what and why? An examination of social class, the 
social conditions which lead to class formation, class-related 
behavior, social class through the life cycle and the historical 
basis of stratification, particularly in the United States. 
(Prerequisite: SOC104). Fall. 
 
SOC350.  Selected Topics in Sociology (2-4).  
Examination of a particular topic of current interest to 
faculty and students. Topics which may be considered 
include: applied sociology, conflict management, crime and 
gender, crime prevention, sexual deviance, terrorism 
violence, the sociology of culture, of film, of the media. May 
be repeated with a different topic. (Prerequisite: completion 
of one social science course). Offered as needed. 
 
SOC381.  Sociological Theory (3).  
Provides a survey of the history of social philosophy and 
theory, starting from early human civilizations and 
continuing through the 20th century. Grapples with 
questions about human existence, social organization, 
division of labor, resource allocation, morality and the rule 
of law and non-conformity. (Prerequisite: SOC104 and 
Junior Standing).  
 
SOC385.  Social Research Methods (3).  
An overview of the primary data collection methodologies 
used in social science research, including surveys, 
experiments, interviews, and observation. Introduces basic 
analytic skills appropriate for quantitative and qualitative 
data. Discusses considerations such as research ethics, 
validity and reliability, and critical consumption of data. 
(Prerequisite: SOC381). Fall 
 
SOC399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
Students have the opportunity to participate in field projects 
or work with professional staff members in organizations 
such as police and sheriff’s departments, courts, probation 
departments, 
juvenile 
centers, 
correction 
facilities, 
prevention agencies, community organizations and human 
service organizations. Open to juniors and seniors. 
 
 
 
SOC405.  Critical Theory of Society (3). 
This course uses an interdisciplinary approach to examine 
how legal, political and social institutions function within 
society. It gives special emphasis to the roles class, 
authority, and ideology play within these systems. 
(Prerequisite: SOC104). Offered as needed. 
 
SOC407.  Capstone: Senior Research (3).  
Each student will execute the scientific research process 
from start to finish, including: theoretical application; 
forming and testing research questions; database creation 
and management; utilizing existing data in social science 
fields or independent data collection; analysis of 
quantitative or qualitative data; and writing and presenting 
conclusions in a professional manner. (Prerequisites: 
SOC381 and SOC385). Spring 
 
SOC451.  Independent Study (1-4).  
Supervised reading and research in sociology, criminal 
justice. (Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
SOC499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
 
Courses in Social Work (SOCW) 
 
SOCW199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).  
An observational internship providing opportunities to gain 
relevant career experiences and information in the field of 
social work. Open to second-semester freshmen and above. 
 
 
SOCW200.  Foundations of Social Work (4).  
The development, skills, knowledge, and perspectives of the 
Social Work profession. Students will be introduced to 
concepts fundamental to understanding the helping 
professions’ efforts on behalf of vulnerable populations. 
Includes history, practice settings, professional roles, 
agencies, political implications, and values/ethics related to 
social work careers. Includes a required service learning 
project. Fall,  
 
SOCW299.  Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
SOCW314.  Professional Writing & Documentation (4). 
The course prepares students for the writing demands of 
professional, agency-based practice.  Special attention will 
be given to structure of documents, appropriate information 
to include, and the social worker role in the documentation 
process.  (Prerequisites: Acceptance in the Social Work 
program and declared Social Work major). 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
266 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
SOCW325.  Diversity: Inequality, Privilege, &  
Oppression (4). 
The dynamics of diversity and difference in American 
society The impact of human differences such as age, class, 
color, culture, disability, ethnicity, gender, gender identity 
and expression, immigration status, political ideology, race, 
religion, sex, and sexual orientation on life chances, 
including discrimination and oppression outcomes will be 
studied Fall.  
 
SOCW330.  Human Behavior in the Social  
Environment (4).  
Study of the person in her/his environment using models of 
human behavior focusing on the interaction between persons 
and the social systems they encounter throughout 
maturation. Knowledge about persons as biological, 
psychological, social, cultural, and spiritual creatures is 
integrated as the “person” is followed through the life cycle. 
Special attention will be given to the interactions and 
systems as they relate to and affect Social Work practice 
with a variety of populations, including those  experiencing  
ethnic,  racial, and age-based discrimination. (Prerequisite: 
SOCW200).  
 
SOCW331.  Selected Topics in Social Work (2-4).  
Topics not included in the regular course offerings. Topic 
and prerequisite specified in semester course schedule. May 
be repeated with different topics. Offered as needed. 
 
SOCW333.  Social Welfare Policy & Services (4).  
The development and implementation of social welfare 
policies from historical, political, and philosophical 
frameworks. How does a society decide: who should be 
served, when, how much, and in what fashion? How does 
this reflect the society’s perspectives about “others” in their 
world who may be poor or otherwise disadvantaged? What 
actions are chosen and why? Fall. 
 
SOCW336.  Generalist Social Work Practice Methods I  
(Individuals & Families) (4).  
Theoretical foundations of generalist social work practice 
with individuals and families. Focus on case-management 
skills; assessment, goal-setting, intervention, termination, 
and practice evaluation in a systemic, Person-in-
Environment context. Special attention to work with diverse 
and vulnerable populations.   (Prerequisites:   SOCW200, 
SOCW330 and admission to the Social Work program). 
Fall. 
 
SOCW337.  Generalist Social Work Practice Methods  
II (Groups, Communities, & Organizations) (4).  
Theoretical foundations of generalist social work practice 
with groups, communities, and organizations. Groups 
dynamics concepts used to apply problem-solving methods 
for treatment and task groups. Community organization 
emphasized as a viable practice method. Close relationship 
between community and organizations explored through 
concepts of empowerment, control, mobilization, collective 
action and problem-solving. (Prerequisite: SOCW336). 
 
 
SOCW382.  Trauma Across the Lifespan (4). 
This course prepares for the demands of professional 
exposure to trauma related topics, to better prepare them for 
common symptom presentation, generational trauma 
exposure, developmental trauma, and common treatments 
for simple and complex trauma. 
 
SOCW390.  Social Work Research Methods (4). 
Overview of research methodologies used in social work 
practice and publication.  Format includes lectures and 
experiential learning to develop a research proposal, 
including techniques for quantitative and qualitative data 
analysis and presentation.  (Prerequisites: Acceptance in the 
Social Work Program and declared Social Work major).   
 
SOCW399.  Professional Internship (1-12).  
Students have the opportunity to participate in field projects 
or work with professional staff members in organizations 
such as prevention agencies, human service organizations, 
juvenile centers, community organizations, and probation 
departments. Open to juniors and seniors. 
 
SOCW404.  Modern Social Work Theory (4).  
Major theoretical systems used in current social work 
practice at the micro, mezzo, and macro levels.  Application 
to special populations will be included.   (Prerequisites: 
SOCW337, senior standing, and permission of department). 
 
SOCW405.  Capstone: Senior Social Work (2).  
Culminating course in social work that synthesizes theory, 
research, policy and practice methods.  Students produce 
documents that combines research and analysis applied to 
practice in the field. Understanding of social work concepts 
and readiness/competency to begin the professional social 
work practice must be demonstrated.  (Prerequisites: senior 
standing, 
departmental 
permission, 
Co-requisites: 
SOCW496).  Fall,  
 
SOCW451.  Independent Study (1-4).  
Supervised reading and 
research in social 
work. 
(Prerequisite: permission of department). 
 
SOCW495.  Social Work Practicum I (5).  
With SOCW496, two consecutive semesters of supervised 
practicum consisting of a minimum of 400 hours in an 
Course Descriptions 
 
267 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
approved social work setting. Requires weekly seminars on 
campus. 
Social 
Work 
majors 
only. 
(Prerequisites: 
SOCW337 and permission of Social Work Program 
Director). Fall,  
 
SOCW496.  Social Work Practicum II (5).  
Continuation of SOCW495. (Prerequisite: SOCW495). Fall, 
 
 
SOCW499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-4). 
 
 
Courses in Teacher  
Eduction (T ED) 
 
Candidates are required to complete 200 hours of 
field/clinical experiences in school settings, appropriate to 
their certification areas and levels, before Associate 
Teaching Most of these hours will be completed as  
co-requisite experiences for T ED courses (while enrolled in 
the various sections of T ED200 and T ED300 listed below)
A log sheet for documenting hours (including cooperating 
teachers’ signatures) is provided in the Guide to Teacher 
Certification.  
 
ED101.  Explorations in Education (1).  
An opportunity for freshman and sophomore students to 
explore the field of professional education by evaluating 
their own motivations, skills, and abilities related to 
teaching.  This class is open to only Freshman and 
Sophomore teacher education. 
ED102.  Foundations in Health and Physical 
Education (3). 
This introductory class addresses the history of health and 
physical 
education, 
including 
their 
collaborative 
relationship in school and the evolution of coordinated 
School Health and Whole School, Whole Community, and 
Whole Child Approach The relationship between health 
and academic success will also be discussed. 
 
ED103.  Lifetime Nutrition (3). 
This class will address the nutrition basics applied to 
daily living Also includes nutrition and wellness 
concepts in relation to the individual and family 
throughout the lifespan.  
 
T ED106.  Personal Health (3).  
Introduction to the six risk factors identified by the CDC; 
how they impact the individual’s personal fitness, wellness, 
and health Topics include; nutrition, physical activity, 
intentional/unintentional injury, sexuality, tobacco, alcohol 
and other drugs, stress management; disease prevention 
Empowers students to make responsible decision that lead 
to healthy lifetime behaviors.  
 
T ED108.  Instructional Technology Foundations (1).  
The exploration of technology based education that can be 
utilized at the elementary, middle and secondary levels.  
Students will participate in tech based experiences that can 
enhance productivity, engagement and critical thinking in 
the classroom. Fall,  
 
T ED109.  Introduction to Educational Technology (2). 
The 
introduction 
of 
instructional 
technology 
into 
elementary, middle, and secondary programs, including the 
use of software and hardware and the appropriate 
application of available materials to specific classroom 
settings. 
In 
addition, 
students 
will 
demonstrate 
competencies in the use of computer technology tools
(Prerequisite: TED101) Fall.
 
T ED199.  Exploratory Internship (1-3).   
 
T ED204.  Educational Psychology (3) (SOCIAL  
SCIENCE). 
The application of psychological principles in education, 
focusing on the teacher as a professional educator and as an 
individual. Topics include the components of effective 
classroom teaching and pre-adolescent and adolescent 
development (Prerequisite:  T ED 101; Co-requisite: T ED 
204L) Fall.   
 
T ED204L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Provides the opportunity to gain observational and practical 
experience in the classroom setting. Thirty field hours are 
required for each semester hour of academic credit Students 
are placed in the field in accordance with their major/minor
(Prerequisite:TED101;Co-requisite: T ED204) Fall, Spring .
 
T ED205.  Education of Exceptional Students (3).  
An overview of characteristics, needs, and current practices 
in the education of the gifted, mentally challenged, 
emotionally impaired, physically handicapped, and those 
with cultural differences. The course will cover preschool, 
pre-adolescent and the adolescent exceptional student. (Co-
requisite: T ED 205L)Fall,  
 
T ED205L.  Clinical Experience (1) 
 Students will receive clinical placements in classroom 
settings with students who are identified as 
exceptional (with an approved IEP or 
accommodations). (Prerequisite:TED204; Co-
requisite: T ED205). 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
268 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
T ED206W.  Child Development: Conception Through  
Early Childhood (3).  
An in-depth study of the physical, social, emotional, and 
intellectual development of children, including children 
with special needs. (Prerequisite:  T ED 204, T ED 204L, T 
ED 205, T ED 205L)  Writing Intensive. 
 
T ED208.  History & Geography for the Elementary  
Teaching Experience (3). 
An overview of the knowledge, understanding and 
application of the major concepts of history, geography 
expectations, lessons, topics, concepts taught; of texts and 
instructional material used, in grades K-8 in preparation for 
the State of Michigan elementary teacher certification tests, 
and for those interested, Social Studies endorsement tests. 
 
T ED209.  Civics, Government & Economics for the  
Elementary Teacher (3). 
An introduction to the knowledge, understanding and 
application of the major concepts of civics, government and 
economics expectations, lessons, topics, and concepts 
taught; tests, instructional materials used in grades K-8. 
Preparation for the State of Michigan elementary teacher 
certification tests, and for those interested, social studies 
endorsement tests. 
 
T ED211.  Classroom Experience - Early  
Childhood (1).  
A specialized section of T ED200 for the Early Childhood 
Education minor. This field-based course is designed for 
teacher candidates in early childhood to observe young 
children and gain practical experience in early-childhood 
settings. Thirty field hours are required. (Co-requisite: TED 
206). Fall. 
 
T ED217.  Adolescent Development (3).  
An in-depth study of the physical, social, emotional and 
intellectual development of adolescents as applied to the 
unique problems and possibilities confronting adolescents. 
(Prerequisite: CCC102; Co-requisite: T ED217L). 
 
T ED217L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Provides the opportunity to gain observational and 
practical experience in the classroom setting.  Thirty field 
hours are required for each semester hour academic credit. 
(Co-requisite: T ED217: Adolescent Development) 
 
T ED221.  Physical Health and Wellness (3). 
Physical Health and wellness risk factors and protective 
factors will be addresses  Topics will include safety, 
alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs, nutrition and physical 
fitness  Their relationship to overall health will be addressed 
including relevant resources. 
 
T ED240.  Foundations of Education (3). 
Examine the historical, philosophical, and 
sociological foundations of education as they relate to 
schools. Students will develop an understanding of 
the relationship between society and education. 
Students will also examine the teaching field, current 
trends, and teaching as a profession. Fall,  
 
T ED242.  Multicultural Education in the 21st Century 
(3). 
This course provides an introduction to cultural and 
diversity issues related to education. It explores 
individual differences of self and others regarding 
ethnicity, race, socioeconomic status, gender identity, 
exceptionalities, citizenship, language, and sexual 
orientation in the context of education and society
Topics also include power, class, privilege, and social 
justice in schools; and navigating the current system 
to remove the barriers to equity.  
 
T ED277.  Mathematics for Elementary Teachers 
Grade PK-3 (3). 
A mathematics content course for prospective PK-3 
elementary school teachers. Topics include 
unpacking content; identifying competence; 
performing explanations; choosing, interpreting, and 
talking with representations; and eliciting, 
interpreting, supporting, and extending others’ 
thinking with regards to: attribution, counting and 
whole number representation, early fraction 
representation, and whole number operations
Mathematical manipulatives will be used in this 
course.  
 
T ED278.  Mathematics for Elementary Teachers 
Grades 3-6 (3). 
A mathematics content course for prospective 
elementary teachers in grades 3-6. Topics include 
unpacking content and identifying competence; 
performing and supporting children’s mathematical 
explanations; choosing, interpreting, and talking with 
representations; and eliciting, interpreting, and 
extending others’ thinking with regards to whole 
numbers, fractions, decimals, and operations. 
Mathematical manipulatives will be used in this 
course. Fall. 
 
T ED279L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Clinical study of the structure of learning in schools. Special 
attention is paid to the nature of learning in specific areas of 
academic study, such as actual pupil-teacher experience. 
Course Descriptions 
 
269 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Thirty contact hours are required for each semester of 
academic credit. (Co-requisite: T ED279). 
 
T ED281.  Today’s Health Content I (3). 
Comprehensive Health Ed. is one of the eight components 
of a Coordinated School Health Program. Provides an 
understanding of optimal nutrition, weight mgmt 
principles, physical activity, concepts & responsible use of 
ATOD Emphasis on providing accurate age-appropriate 
functional knowledge selecting effective educational 
resource materials and encouraging children to adopt 
healthy behaviors.  
 
T ED282.  Today’s Health Content II (3). 
Continuation of content in  a Comprehensive Health 
Education Curriculum; topics include mental/emotional 
health, 
intentional/unintentional 
injuries, 
character 
education, suicide and violence prevention. Emphasizes 
providing age-appropriate functional knowledge, selecting 
effective educational resources materials and encouraging 
children to adopt health behaviors.  Fall. 
 
T ED291.  Elementary Science Principles I (3) 
This course explores objectives, methods, and content in 
PK-6 science instruction, emphasizing concept development 
in several areas of PK-6 science; refers to pertinent 
contributions from research; provides opportunity for 
engaging in core teaching practices around investigation-
based science lessons. Elementary teacher candidates will 
explore the use of the NGSS standards in planning for 
instruction. Fall. 
 
T ED292.  Elementary Science Principles II (3). 
This course will provide PK-6 elementary teacher 
candidates with pedagogical content knowledge, principles 
of science, and content standards in the major concepts of 
physical, life, and earth and space sciences along with 
integration of STEM concepts.   
 
T ED299.  Experimental Course (1-3). 
 
T ED300.  Clinical Experience (1).  
Laboratory study of the structure of learning in schools. 
Special attention is paid to the nature of learning in specific 
areas of academic study, such as in actual pupil-teacher 
experience. This course is a co-requisite to  
T ED330, T ED340, and most secondary education methods 
courses. Elementary candidates should register for 1 credit 
of T ED300 each semester in which they are enrolled in a 
methods course. Thirty contact hours are required for each 
semester hour of academic credit. May be repeated. 
Fall/  
 
 
T ED308.  Partnerships Between Home, School &  
Community in Early Childhood Education (2). 
Create an understanding of both why and how to build 
partnerships between home, schools and communities in 
early childhood education. 
 
ED309.  Special Needs/Inclusion in the Early  
Childhood Education (3). 
Provides an understanding of the background, both legal and 
historical, of special needs children in the early childhood 
setting.  Focus on development of practices that help 
identify, plan for and work with children who have special 
needs.  (Prerequisite: T ED206). 
 
T ED311.  Clinical Experience - Early Childhood (1).  
A specialized section of T ED300 for the Early Childhood 
Education minor. Laboratory study of the structure of 
learning in early childhood settings. Special attention is paid 
to the nature of developmentally-appropriate practice and 
learning. Thirty contact hours are required. 
(Co-requisite: T ED364). 
 
T ED312.  Human Anatomy & Physiology for  
Teachers (3). 
Open to T ED students only.  Overview of structure and 
function of all levels or organization in humans, with 
emphasis on organs and organ systems.  Course structure 
will 
model teaching concepts such as classroom 
management, as well as safety and teaching strategies.  
(Prerequisites: BIOL103 and BIOL104, or permission of 
instructor; Co-requisite: T ED313). 
 
T ED313.  Human Anatomy & Physiology for  
Teachers Lab (1). 
Open to T ED students only.  Overview of structure and 
function of all levels or organization in humans, with 
emphasis on organs and organ systems.  Course structure 
will 
model teaching concepts such as classroom 
management, as well as safety and teaching strategies.  
(Prerequisites: BIOL103 and BIOL104, or permission of 
instructor; Co-requisite: T ED312). 
 
T ED320.  Creative Programs for Young Children (3).  
Methods of planning the curriculum for a preschool program 
in small and large group settings, including creative 
expression, language arts, music and rhythm, science, pre-
number experiences and large and small motor skills. 
Planning for children with special needs in the regular 
preschool program is also included. (Prerequisite: T 
ED206). Offered as needed. 
Course Descriptions 
 
270 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
T ED330.  Teaching-Learning Processes:  
Secondary and K-12 (3).  
The teaching-learning processes in the middle and 
secondary schools, with emphasis on such competencies as 
formulating purposes of the school; developing a philosophy 
of classroom management; identifying learning styles; 
developing course, unit and lesson plans; meeting 
curriculum standards; setting learning objectives; and 
developing assessment instruments. (Co-requisite: 
T ED300;  Art Education candidates enroll in ART330 as 
the co-requisite; Level 2 Progression Interview to be 
completed in course). Fall,  
 
T ED332.  Teaching Language Arts in the Middle & 
Secondary School (2).  
Designing and selecting materials that engage students in 
learning 
the 
English 
language 
arts; 
differentiating 
instruction through a variety of instructional and assessment 
strategies; 
Michigan’s 
ELA 
content 
expectations. 
(Prerequisite: T ED330; Co-requisite:  
T ED300).  
 
T ED335.  Teaching Modern Languages in the Middle  
& Secondary School (2).  
Methods of teaching modern languages with emphasis on: 
best instructional practices, teaching methodologies and 
techniques, 
systematic 
classroom 
organization 
and 
management, 
instructional 
technology 
integration, 
standards based education including the Michigan 
Curriculum content standards. Subject/grade appropriate 
clinical experience must be completed concurrently with the 
course. Required for secondary or K-12 certification in 
world language. (Prerequisite: T ED330; Co-requisite: T 
ED300).  
 
T ED336.  Teaching Mathematics in the Middle & 
Secondary School (2).  
Standards 
based 
mathematics 
instruction 
including: 
Michigan Curriculum content expectations; differentiating 
instruction through various teaching and assessment 
methodologies; classroom organization and management; 
instructional technology integration. (Prerequisite: T 
ED330; Co-requisite: T ED300).  
 
T ED337.  Teaching Physical Education in the  
Elementary, Middle & Secondary School (2).  
Standards based physical education; planning and delivering 
a variety of teaching/learning strategies to meet the needs of 
diverse students; classroom organization, management and 
safety. Required methods course for elementary, secondary, 
or K12 PE certification. (Prerequisite: T ED330 or T ED340 
and ESAT222;  
Co-requisite: T ED300).  
 
T ED338.  Teaching Health Education in the Middle  
and Secondary School (3).  
Standards based health instruction; assessment of student 
learning and needs; selecting, planning and delivering a 
variety of teaching/learning strategies to meet the needs of 
diverse students; integrating health education across the 
curriculum; use of technology to support student learning. 
Subject/grade appropriate clinical experience must be 
completed concurrently with the course. (Prerequisite:  
T ED330; Co-requisite: T ED300). Fall. 
 
T ED339.   Teaching Modern Languages in K-12  
Schools (2). 
Methods of teaching modern languages with emphasis on: 
best instructional practices, teaching methodologies and 
techniques, 
systematic 
classroom 
organization 
and 
management, 
instructional 
technology 
integration, 
standards based education including the Michigan 
Curriculum content standards.  Subject/grade appropriate 
clinical experience must be completed concurrently with the 
course.  Required for K-12 certification in world language.  
(Prerequisite: T ED330; co-requisite: T ED300).   
 
T ED340.  Teaching/Learning Processes:  
Elementary (3). 
Teaching-learning processes in elementary and middle 
school, with emphasis on such competencies as formulating 
purposes of the school; developing a philosophy of 
classroom 
management; 
identifying 
learning 
styles; 
developing course, unit and lesson plans; addressing 
curriculum standards; setting learning objectives; and 
developing assessment instruments. This course serves as a 
prerequisite for all other elementary education methods 
classes. (Prerequisite:  T ED 204, 205, and application 
submitted for Level 2 Progression; Co-requisite:  T ED 
340L) Fall. 
 
T ED340L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Clinical study of the structure of learning in schools. Special 
attention is paid to the nature of learning in specific areas of 
academic study, such as actual pupil-teacher experience and 
classroom 
management. 
Thirty contact 
hours 
are 
required for each semester of academic credit. (Co-requisite 
T ED 340) 
 
T ED341.  Teaching Sciences in the Middle &  
Secondary School (2).  
Integrating the sciences using essential features of 
classroom inquiry, best instructional practices, teaching 
methodologies and techniques, systematic classroom 
organization, 
management 
and 
safety, 
instructional 
technology integration, standards-based education including 
Course Descriptions 
 
271 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Michigan’s content expectations. Subject/grade appropriate 
clinical experience must be completed concurrently with the 
course. (Prerequisite:  
T ED330; Co-requisite: T ED300).  
 
T ED343.  Teaching Social Studies in the Middle & 
Secondary School (2).  
Curricular goals and strategies for the social sciences; 
differentiating instruction through a variety of teaching 
methodologies; classroom organization and management, 
integration of technology, Michigan’s content expectations. 
Subject/grade appropriate clinical experience must be 
completed concurrently with the course. (Prerequisite: T 
ED330; Co-requisite: T ED300).  
 
T ED346.  Literacy in Content Areas (3).  
Topics include the application of literacy instruction to all 
content areas; determining the readability of instructional 
materials; determining the suitability of instructional 
materials for given students; recognizing the basic and 
unique literacy skills required in various content areas and 
evaluation of student abilities in using those skills; using 
various strategies for improving student literacy in the 
content areas. (Prerequisite: T ED330; can also be taken as 
a co-requisite). Fall,  
 
T ED347.  Children’s Literature (3). 
Poetry and prose selected especially for children, including 
both classic and recent works, with attention to notable 
illustrators and authors Students will study various genres 
and learn how to use literature with children in a variety of 
settings Designed for students preparing for elementary 
teaching or library work.
 
T ED348.  Adolescent Literature (3). 
Poetry and prose selected especially for adolescents, 
including both classic and recent works.  Students will learn 
about the importance of using literature and poetry with 
children in this age range.  Designed for students preparing 
for secondary teaching or library work. 
 
 
T ED349.  Teaching Communication Arts/Speech in the 
Middle & Secondary School (2).  
Methods of teaching speech and communication arts; 
teaching methods and assessment of student learning, 
classroom organization and management, instructional 
technology, 
standards-based 
education, 
role 
and 
organization of co-curricular activities. Subject/grade 
appropriate clinical experience must be completed 
concurrently with the course. (Prerequisite: T ED330;  
Co-requisite: T ED300).   
 
T ED352.  Secondary Health Methods and  
Technology (3). 
Best practices for health education methods based on the 
Michigan Standards for Health Education.  Teaching 
strategies including assessment of student learning and 
needs to address diverse learning styles, integration of health 
across the curriculum, and the use of technology to support 
student learning.  Contact specific to middle and high school 
setting.  Subject/grade appropriate clinical experience must 
be completed with the course.  (Prerequisite: T ED204; Co-
requisite T ED352L). 
 
T ED352L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Provides the opportunity to gain observational and practical 
experience in the classroom setting. Thirty field hours are 
required for each semester hour of academic credit. Students 
are placed in the field in accordance with their major/minor. 
(Co-requisite TED 352) 
 
T ED353.   Physical Education Curriculum and  
Assessment (3). 
Developing standards based physical education curriculum 
emphasizing program and curriculum design utilizing a 
variety of assessment tools and strategies within the 
curriculum design.  (Prerequisites: T ED354 and/or  
T ED355). 
 
T ED354.   Elementary Health and Physical Education 
Methods (3). 
Designed to provide standards-based active learning 
experiences for health and physical education teacher 
candidates to select, plan, implement and assess 
developmentally appropriate activities in the elementary 
setting to support student learning. (Co-requisites:  
T ED354L). Fall 
 
T ED354L.  Clinical Experience (1) 
Provides the opportunity to gain observational and practical 
experience in the classroom setting. Thirty field hours are 
required for each semester hour of academic credit. Students 
are placed in the field in accordance with their major/minor. 
(Co-requisite: TED354) 
 
T ED355.   Secondary Physical Education Methods and  
Technology (3). 
Designed to provide standards based active learning 
experiences for physical education teacher candidates to 
select, plan, implement and assess developmentally 
appropriate motor activities, including technology infusion 
in the elementary setting to support student learning.  
(Prerequisites: T ED330; Co-Requisite T ED355L). Spring 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
272 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
T ED355L.  Clinical Experience (1) 
Provides the opportunity to gain observational and practical 
experience in the classroom setting. Thirty field hours are 
required for each semester hour of academic credit. Students 
are placed in the field in accordance with their major/minor. 
(Co-requisite: TED355) Spring 
 
T ED356.  Early Language and Literacy Development 
(3). 
An introduction to language and literacy in the young child. 
Students 
will 
explore 
phonological 
and 
phonemic 
awareness, oral language development, high frequency 
vocabulary, spelling strategies and fluency development. 
Students will learn the importance of a child’s cultural 
background and how experiences influence their literacy 
development. Students will learn how to create and foster a 
literacy-print rich environment that engages children in 
developmentally appropriate experiences. (Prerequisites: T 
ED204 and T ED205)Fall. 
 
T ED357.  Writing Instruction K-6 (3). 
The purpose of this course is to provide the student with 
knowledge of various writing practices and skills and how 
to apply those practices into classrooms with diverse 
students. Students will be taught strategies in how to teach 
and assess vocabulary, handwriting, composition, speaking 
and listening. (Prerequisites T ED204 and T ED205). 
 
 
T ED358.  Teaching Reading in the 21st Century (3). 
Provides 
teacher 
candidates 
with 
an 
integrated 
understanding of the literacy constructs across the PK-6, 
grade levels. Additional topics include research-based 
exploration of the nature of the reading process and related 
classroom practice.  Teacher candidates will also examine 
an equity framework for culturally and historically 
responsive literacy using quality multicultural children’s 
literature. (Prerequisites: T ED340 and T ED356)  
 
T ED359.  Reading Instructional Practices and 
Assessment (3). 
Topics include the application of reading instruction in 
content areas; development and/or selection of objectives 
for reading instruction; reading assessments, factors which 
contribute to difficulties in literacy, methods to evaluate 
student progress, procedures for strengthening students’ 
literacy learning; and communication to stakeholders. 
Students will utilize this understanding to implement 
culturally responsive and developmentally appropriate 
instructional practices related to literacy. (Prerequisites: T 
ED340, T ED356, T ED357, and T ED358) Fall. 
 
T ED360.  Language Arts Methods for Elementary 
Teachers (3). 
This course focuses on theory and research in using 
integrated, discipline-based instruction in teaching reading 
and writing to promote student achievement across content 
area subjects. Instructional approaches include the 
examination of an integrated, inquiry-based curriculum 
series using a multidisciplinary approach to increase student 
learning. (Prerequisites: T ED356, T ED357, T ED358, T 
ED359 and T ED340)  
 
T ED360L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Clinical study of the structure of learning in schools. Special 
attention is paid to the nature of learning in specific areas of 
academic study, such as actual pupil-teacher experience. 
Thirty contact hours are required for each semester of 
academic credit. (Co-requisite: T ED360) 
 
T ED364.  Methods and Materials for Early Childhood  
Education (3).  
The 
history, 
theories, 
and 
basic 
principles 
of 
developmentally appropriate instruction, along 
with 
methods and materials appropriate to early childhood 
education are studied (Prerequisite: T ED206;  
Co-requisite: T ED311) Offered as needed.  
 
T ED365.  Teaching of Reading I & Clinical  
Experience (3).  
An introduction to literacy education. Topics include 
research-based exploration of the nature of the reading 
process and related classroom practice; emergent and early 
literacy; developing word identification skills, including 
phonics; and building vocabulary. Comprehension is 
emphasized throughout the course. Peer teaching or 
elementary classroom teaching is also included. (Co-
requisite: T ED340). Fall. 
 
T ED366.  Teaching of Reading II & Clinical  
Experience (3).  
Topics include the application of reading instruction to 
content areas; the organization and management of 
classroom reading programs; the development and/or 
selection of specific objectives for reading instruction; a 
survey of factors which contribute to difficulties in literacy 
education, techniques for evaluating student progress, and 
programs and procedures for strengthening literacy learning; 
and communication of information to administrators, 
parents, teachers and students. Field experience is a required 
part of the course. (Prerequisite: T ED365).  
 
 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
273 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
T ED374.  Teaching Foreign Languages in Elementary  
Schools (2).  
Methods of teaching world languages in the elementary 
school (FLES) classroom. Topics include: theories and 
research on second language acquisition in children; current 
methods and trends; the development of appropriate 
instructional and assessment techniques; the integration of 
foreign languages into the elementary curriculum. Required 
for elementary or K-12 certification in a world language. 
(Prerequisites: T ED340 and permission of instructor). 
Offered as needed. 
 
T ED375.  Teaching of Science & Mathematics in the  
Elementary School & Clinical Experience (3).  
Methods of teaching. Topics include an examination of the 
latest curricula in relation to the integration of science and 
mathematics as well as each area as a distinct discipline; 
how students learn; as well as best practices of effective and 
reflective teaching.  Clinical experience will provide 
practical application of coursework.  
 
T ED376.  Teaching of Social Studies & Language  
Arts in the Elementary School (3).  
Methods of teaching through an examination of the latest 
curricula in relation to the integration of Social Studies and 
Language Arts as well as each area as a distinct discipline; 
how students learn, and best practices of effective and 
reflective teaching.  Clinical experience provides practical 
application of coursework. 
 
T ED379.  Elementary Mathematical Methods: 
Planning, Sequencing, Teaching and Assessing Grades 
PK-6 (3). 
Students will gain experience with how to: build and 
draw on relationships with children, caregivers, and 
communities in ways that support children’s mathematics 
learning; plan mathematics lessons and sequences of  
lessons; use formative and summative mathematics 
assessments to gauge children’s learning and to make 
instructional decisions; and enact instruction that allows all 
children to engage with significant mathematics as 
well as develop productive dispositions toward 
mathematics. (Prerequisites: MATH101 or 
placement test, T ED277, and T ED278; Co-requisite T 
ED379L) Fall. 
 
T ED 379L:  Clinical Experience (1): Clinical study of 
the structure of learning in schools. Special attention is 
paid to the nature of learning in specific areas of academic 
study, such as actual pupil-teacher experience. Thirty 
contact hours are required for each semester of academic 
credit. (Co-requisite: T ED 379) 
 
T ED380.  Capstone: Role of the Health Educator (3).  
Capstone class for the health minor explores the health 
educator’s roles  within the school and community, 
including: providing resources, leadership and advocacy in 
support of young people’s health Partnerships with key 
community and state organizations are emphasized
Participation in a health education related conference is 
required (Prerequisites: T ED281, T ED282 and  
T ED398).   
 
T ED381.  School Health Curriculum (3).  
Introduction to health curriculum models as they apply to a 
Comprehensive School health Education Program. Students 
will examine criteria for evaluating effective curricula, 
scope and sequence Students will analyze factors that 
influence choices of curricula, strategies and materials 
Michigan Model for health Curriculum will be extensively 
utilized (Prerequisites: T ED106, T ED281, T ED282 and T 
ED398).  
 
T ED390.  Integrated Science Seminar (1).  
Required for all TED Integrated Science Group majors.  A 
course exploring critical issues in Integrated Science 
through selected readings, discussion and presentations (oral 
and written). Students will apply readings to their areas of 
study and certification and develop instructional plans for 
use in the classroom. (Prerequisites: Senior standing or 
permission of  instructor and  TED341).  
 
T ED392.  Science and Social Studies Methods for 
Elementary Teachers (3). 
Through co-teaching, students will experience how to plan, 
sequence, teach, and assess science lessons focused on 
reasoning and arguing from evidence; making thinking 
public and critiquing others; creating and interpreting 
complex text; and making sense of the world. Skill with 
applying concepts and modes of inquiry from the integration 
of the social studies to promote learners&#39; abilities to 
make informed decisions as engaged citizens and enact 
change in society will also be honed. (Pre-requisite:T 
ED291, T ED292, T ED208, T ED209, and TED340; Co-
requisite T 329L) Fall. 
 
T ED392L.  Clinical Experience (1). 
Clinical study of the structure of learning in schools. Special 
attention is paid to the nature of learning in specific areas of 
academic study, such as actual pupil-teacher experience. 
Thirty contact hours are required for each semester of 
academic credit. (Co-requisite:  T ED 392) 
 
T ED398.  Teaching Sexuality in Schools (3).  
Sexuality is a content area in a Comprehensive Health 
Education Curriculum, one of the eight components of a 
Course Descriptions 
 
274 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Coordinated School health Program. Addresses how to 
implement a human sexuality curriculum at the middle and 
or high school level Legalities, teaching strategies, sensitive 
issues, values and resources will be covered (Prerequisite: 
ESAT100 or T ED106)  Fall. 
 
T ED399.  Professional Internship (1-4).   
A full-time, intensive clinical experience. May be a paid 
position. (Available to Level 2 teacher candidates. A 4-
credit internship is required for the Early Childhood 
Education Planned Program Minor). Requires 30 clinical 
hours for each credit hour. (Prerequisites: Level 2 admission 
and permission of  department chair). 
 
T ED400.  Associate Teaching (1-12).  
Teaching in an appropriate grade or subject level of the 
elementary, middle or secondary schools for 10-12 semester 
hours (12 to 14 weeks). Individuals pursuing K-12 
certification in art, music, physical education or a world 
language must enroll for 12 credit hours and will be placed 
in both elementary and secondary classrooms. (Prerequisite: 
Admission into the Level 3 Professional Semester; Co-
requisite: T ED 407, T ED 444) 
 
T ED401.  Child Care Administration (3).  
The role of the preschool program and its director and the 
legal and administrative controls which affect them. 
Students will participate in field-based experience in a 
nursery school and day-care center and will simulate the 
responsibility for organizing and administering a child care 
program. (Prerequisite: T ED206). Offered as needed. 
 
T ED402.  Assessment in Health Education (3).  
The competent school health teacher evaluates the 
effectiveness of a school-based health ed. program. 
Appropriate content, skills, & methodology to develop 
assessment strategies for health education will be covered. 
Numerous assessment tools will be used including rubrics, 
formative 
and 
summative 
evaluation 
techniques
(Prerequisites: T ED281, T ED282 and T ED398) Fall. 
T ED404.  Assessment of Children in Early  
Childhood (3).  
This course includes early childhood assessment techniques, 
both formal and informal for children age 0 to 8.  Focus on 
Structured observations, behavioral rating scales, psycho-
educational screenings, and parent-child interactions. 
 
T ED407.  Assessment & Evaluation (2).  
 The evaluation of goals, objectives, and testing techniques; 
creation of teacher-made tests and interpretation of 
standardized tests; recording and reporting test results; the 
use of test results in planning. (Prerequisite:  Level 3 
Progression; Co-requisites: T ED 400, T ED 444)Fall, 
 
 
T ED408.  Applications of Instructional Technology (1). 
The application of technology based education in teaching 
and learning that can be utilized at the elementary, middle 
and secondary levels.  Students will apply best practices in 
tech based experiences that can maximize productivity, 
engagement and critical thinking in the classroom.  Fall, 
 
 
T ED409.  Online Learning and Technology 
Applications (2). 
The integration of instructional technology into elementary, 
middle, and secondary programs, including the appropriate 
use of technology tools available for specific classroom 
settings. Applications for online or remote learning will also 
be included to ensure best practices for this digital 
environment. Students will get lots of practical tips, ideas, 
and resources to make a plan for classroom and remote 
learning. (Prerequsite: TED109) Fall, Spring 
 
T ED410.  Social and Emotional Health and Learning 
(3). 
This course addresses individual and population approaches 
to dealing with social and emotional health issues. Topics 
include mental illness, historical perspectives, the role of 
educators in social and emotional learning, determinants of 
mental health, stress and coping, understanding psychotic 
disorders, mood disorders, anxiety, personality disorders, 
ATOD dependence, and treatment. The relationship of 
learning to overall health will be discussed including 
relevant resources. 
 
T ED412.   Health and Physical Education Capstone (3). 
Course will review the health and physical educator’s role 
within the Whole School, Whole Community, and Whole 
Child Model  Partnerships with key community leaders are 
emphasized Participation at a state or national conference 
required.   
 
T ED414.  Practicum in Early Childhood (3). 
This course will provide students with practical experience 
in the field.  Students will engage in planning, 
implementing and evaluating instructional materials while 
immersed in a classroom setting; working with a 
cooperating teacher for 90 hours.  (Prerequisites: 
T ED320 and T ED364). 
 
T ED415.  MTTC Prep (1). 
This course is designed to facilitate the strengthening of 
study skills and strategies to increase students’ 
performance and success on the Michigan Test of Teacher 
Course Descriptions 
 
275 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
Certification (MTTC). Students will learn how to process 
information more efficiently, manage time effectively, 
reduce stress and procrastination, and read critically. Fall, 
 
 
T ED443.  Educator Portfolio Preparation (1). 
Students will research, develop and refine a teaching 
portfolio The students will participate in class discussions 
for a deeper exploration into topics and issues related to 
artifact selection, rationale writing and aesthetics for a 
professional portfolio Fall. 
 
T ED444.  Associate Teaching Seminar (2).  
The course is devoted to discussion and appraisal of the 
candidate’s teaching experiences and development of a 
portfolio demonstrating achievement of Interstate Teacher 
Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) Standards. 
The course includes discussion of topics and issues 
including execution of effective lessons, classroom 
discipline, and ways of providing and accepting effective 
feedback. Also considered are teacher associations, job 
interviewing, and resume building. (Prerequisite:  Level 3 
Progression; Co-requisites:  T ED 400, T ED 407) 
Fall,  
 
T ED451.  Independent Study (1-4).  
(Prerequisite: permission of  department chair). 
 
T ED490-T ED498.  Workshop, Seminar or Colloquium 
in Education (1-6).  
The laboratory approach is emphasized in the study of 
administrative, classroom and supervisory problems. 
 
T ED499.  Advanced Experimental Course (1-4). 
NULL .
 
THRE100.  Theatre Workshop I (1).  
This seminar course explores the relationship of theatre to 
the world around us. It includes visiting guest artists, 
workshops, techniques, and special topics of current theatre. 
Significant practical work on departmental productions in 
acting, directing, management, design, and or construction 
will be expected. (Prerequisite: permission of instructor).  
Fall,   
 
THRE101.  Theatre Workshop II (1).  
Continuation of Theatre Workshop I. This seminar course 
explores the relationship of theatre to the world around us. 
It included visiting guest artists, workshops, techniques, and 
special topics of current theater. Significant practical work 
in 
departmental 
productions 
in 
acting, 
directing, 
management, design, and/or construction will be expected. 
(Prerequisite: THRE100).  Fall,   
 
THRE106.  Introduction to Theatre (3) (ARTS).  
An examination of the theatre and its place as an art form in 
our society, including the personnel and basic literary, 
aesthetic and production techniques involved in dramatic 
production.  Fall,  
 
THRE108.  Acting I: Introduction to Acting (3)  
(ARTS).  
Fundamental principles of acting with emphasis on training 
and practice in the acting craft, includes exercises in 
improvisation and characterization  Fall.  
 
THRE207.  Stagecraft (3).  
Technical aspects of play production, including basic shop 
techniques and tools, parts and functions of the stage, 
scenery construction and painting and an introduction to 
stage lighting, and costuming. Lecture and laboratory. Open 
to freshmen.  Fall. 
 
THRE250.  Topics in Dramatic Literature (3) (ARTS).  
A focused study of dramatic literature such as an historical 
period, a country or a particular genre. May be repeated with 
a different topic.  Offered as needed. 
THRE260.  Play Analysis (3) (ARTS).  
This course will study the different methods of analyzing 
dramatic literature intended for performance. With focus on 
structure, genre, theme, style, character, and language, 
students will use dramatic literature that has dominated the 
theatre canon for the past two thousand years. (Prerequisite: 
CCC101) Open to freshman  Fall of odd years. 
 
THRE300.  Theatre Workshop III (1).  
Explores the relationship of theatre to the world around us 
on a more advanced level. It includes visiting guest artists, 
workshops, techniques, special topics of current theatre, and 
other related topics. Significant practical work in acting, 
directing, management, design, and construction will be 
expected. (Prerequisite: THRE101).  Fall,  
 
THRE301.  Theatre Workshop IV (1).  
Explores the relationship of theatre to the world around us 
on a more advanced level. It includes visiting guest artists, 
workshops, techniques, and special topics of current theatre. 
Significant practical work on departmental productions in 
acting, directing, management, design, and or construction 
will be expected. May be repeated. (Prerequisite: 
THRE300).  Fall,   
 
 
 
Course Descriptions 
 
276 
Degree Index      Table of Contents 
THRE303.  Acting II: Character Portrayal (3).  
Theory and practice in the art of creating a believable 
character for the stage, with emphasis on representational 
theatre techniques. (Prerequisite: THRE108).  Fall. 
 
THRE304.  Play Directing (3).  
Basic laboratory training in the techniques of conducting 
rehearsals and directing the work of actors and other play 
production 
personnel. 
(Prerequisite: 
THRE108 
or 
THRE207).  Spring of odd years. 
 
THRE305.  Stage Management (3).  
Insight into the responsibilities and techniques of a stage 
manager in pre-producing, rehearsal and performance. This 
course will concentrate on the collaborative process of 
putting on a live performance. Industry standard 
terminology will be taught. This lecture/lab class will 
require students to participate in classroom discussions, 
activities, and group projects (Prerequisite: THRE108 or 
THRE207).  Spring of even years. 
 
THRE310.  Playwriting Workshop (3).  
This course deals with the step-by-step process of writing 
scripts for the theatre with the final project being a revised 
script of a one-act play. (Prerequisite: CCC101).  Fall. 
 
THRE312.  Production Design: Scenery & Lighting (3).  
Explores the basic principles of scenery and lighting design 
in creating a proper theatre environment. Practical 
application of technique through script analysis, period and 
atmosphere research, design theory, design presentation 
styles, and execution of projects. (Prerequisite: THRE207).  
Spring of odd years. 
 
THRE313.  Production Design: Costume &Makeup (3). 
Examines the basic principles of costume and makeup 
design in creating a character apropos to the theatre 
production. Instruction and practical application of fashion 
history, principles and theories of costume and makeup 
design, character and play analysis, design presentation 
styles, and execution of projects. (Prerequisite: THRE207).  
Spring of even years. 
 
THRE314.  History of Musical Theatre (3) (ARTS).  
The development of a distinctive American art form, from 
the European variety that were its progenitors to the 
contemporary musical range. Various types and styles of 
musical 
theatre 
and 
their 
influences.   
(Prerequisite: successful completion of  a Writing Intensive 
course).  Spring of odd years. 
 
 
 
THRE315.  Theatre History I (3) (ARTS).  
Development of Western drama and the theatre from their 
origins until approximately the Restoration. A less detailed 
exploration of some of the major developments in the history 
of Eastern drama and theatre. Factors that influenced the 
development of the art, and their social, political, economic 
and religious contexts. (Prerequisite: successful completion 
of any Writing Intensive course).  Spring of even years.  
 
THRE316.  Theatre History II (3) (ARTS).  
Development of Western drama and the theatre from 
approximately the Restoration to the present. Factors that 
influenced the development of the art, and their social, 
political, economic and religious contexts.  (Prerequisite: 
Must have successfully passed any Writing Intensive 
course).  Fall of even years. 
 
THRE394.  Advanced Play Direction (3).  
Advanced study in play direction, including analysis, 
research, 
rehearsal 
and 
performance 
techniques. 
(Prerequisites: THRE304 and permission of instructor). 
Offered as needed. 
 
THRE398.  Acting III: Advanced Acting (3).  
Advanced 
theory 
and 
practice 
in 
acting 
styles, 
representational and presentational theatre techniques, and 
individualized and small group practice. (Prerequisite: 
THRE303).  Spring of even years. 
 
THRE415.  Topics Seminar (3).  
An examination of a particular topic of interest to faculty 
members and students in theatre.  (Prerequisite: dependent 
upon topic). With departmental approval, may be repeated 
with different topic.  Offered as needed. 
 
THRE419.  Capstone:  Research (2).   
The student conducts extensive research and design of an 
appropriate topic of their choosing. The results of this course 
will be carried over into a culminating presentation for the 
undergraduate academic career. (Prerequisite: permission of 
department chair).  Fall.  
 
THRE421.  Capstone:  Presentation  (1).   
The student executes the appropriate project for a 
culminating experience to the undergraduate academic 
career.  The project is presented in a departmental forum at 
the end of the term in which the student earns credit for the 
course. (Prerequisites: THRE419 and permission of 
department chair).   
 
 
