ACC 221 Principles of Accounting I (3) (Fall) 
Involves the study of the principles of bookkeeping and financial reporting. Examines the accounting cycle, which 
deals with the analysis, journalizing, and posting of business transactions within the double-entry framework, and 
specialized accounting procedures for service and merchandising businesses.  
Prerequisite: SAT Math Subtest score of 29 or equivalent or a math over MAT 100. 
 
ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II (3) (Spring) 
A continuation of ACC 221 Principles of Accounting I. Shifts emphasis from sole proprietorships and partnerships to 
corporations operating in a manufacturing environment. Includes preparation and analysis of financial statements.  
Prerequisite: ACC 221 Principles of Accounting I. 
 
ACC 314 Cost and Managerial Accounting Theory (3) (Odd Falls) 
Explores the nature of cost accounting, cost concepts and terms, and the flow of costs in an accounting system using 
case studies to enhance an understanding of real-life applications. Focuses on the use of accounting data by managers 
and cost accounting fundamentals, standard costing, cost allocation, costing systems, and variance analysis.  
Prerequisite: ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II. 
 
ACC 317 Intermediate Accounting I (3) (Fall) 
Covers objectives of accounting and the processes that have evolved in response to the objectives. Students develop 
an understanding of basic accounting statements and the limits involved in their preparation. A detailed study of the 
conceptual framework of accounting, income statements, balance sheet, and all assets. 
Prerequisite: ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II. 
 
ACC 318 Intermediate Accounting II (3) (Spring) 
A continuation of Intermediate Accounting I with a more detailed study of liabilities, income tax accounting, owner’s 
equity, statements of cash flows, financial statement analysis, and price change accounting.  
Prerequisite: ACC 317 Intermediate Accounting I. 
 
ACC 341 Cost and Managerial Accounting Practice (3) (Even Springs) 
Examines how managers use cost accounting data in the task of conducting businesses. Highlights the benefits of a 
thorough understanding of accounting information. Broadly exposes how management accountants contribute to the 
internal decision-making process. Topics include determining cost behavior, cost relevance and the decision process, 
pricing decisions, management control systems, cost management in the context of quality and time, inventory 
management, decentralization and transfer compensation, cost-volume-profit and budgeting, and control.  
Prerequisite: ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II. 
 
ACC 360 Accounting Information Systems (3) (Spring) 
Studies computer-based information systems including basic concepts, accounting applications, internal controls, and 
system design and implementation. Includes PC-based accounting systems and their information processing methods.  
Prerequisites: ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II and BUS 162 Business Computer Applications. 
 
ACC 391 Individual Taxation (3) (Even Falls) 
Introduces the federal internal revenue code and income tax regulations applicable to individuals and partnerships, 
such as gross income, taxable income, income tax exemptions and deductions, income tax credits, tax basis of assets, 
tax determination, personal and dependency exemptions, property transactions, gross income, deductions and losses, 
depreciation, tax credits, and alternative minimum tax.  
Prerequisite: ACC 222 Principles of Accounting II. 
 
ACC 392 Organizational Taxation (3) (Spring) 
Examines the federal internal revenue code and income tax regulations applicable to corporations. Topics to be 
covered are corporations (introduction, operating rules and related corporations), organization and capital structure, 
distributions in liquidations, corporate accumulations, as well as exempt entities.  
Prerequisite: ACC 391 Individual Taxation. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ACC 404 Fund Accounting (3) (Odd Springs) 
Emphasizes accounting for the state and local government units. Accounting for hospitals, colleges, universities and 
other not-for-profit organizations is also covered.  
Prerequisite: ACC 317 Intermediate Accounting I. 
 
ACC 442 Auditing Principles I (3) (Even Falls) 
A capstone course integrating accounting standards, accounting systems, internal control structures, the auditing 
functions of evidence gathering, evaluation, and reporting within the context of the professional environment. Also 
includes the audit function, professional standards and ethics, the auditor’s legal liability, the audit evidence process, 
and auditing sampling techniques. Designed to produce competence in auditing theory and practice. 
Prerequisite: ACC 318 Intermediate Accounting II and BUS 351 Statistics. BUS 351 may be taken concurrently with 
proper authorization. 
 
ACC 443 Auditing Principles II (3) (Odd Springs) 
A continuation of ACC 442. Examines the audit engagement, beginning with planning of the engagement and risk 
assessment; the processes of auditing the revenue, conversion, financing, and investing cycles; and special reports, 
compilation, and review engagements. Concludes with the completion of the audit engagement and reporting on 
audited financial statements.  
Prerequisite: ACC 442 Auditing Principles I. 
 
ACC 447 Advanced Accounting (4) (Fall) 
Examines special accounting problems relating to business combinations, the preparation of consolidated financial 
statements, accounting for partnerships, business failures, estates and trusts, etc.  
Prerequisite: ACC 318 Intermediate Accounting II. 
 
ACC 452 Accounting Theory (CPA Review) (4) (Spring) 
Focuses on the development of a comprehensive philosophy of accounting. Critically examines the historical origins of 
accounting concepts, principles, and standards in light of current economic and social institutions. Reviews 
professional practice, current issues, and literature in accounting theory. All topics studied will be on the CPA exam.  
 
AERO (Air Force ROTC) 
AERO courses are available only through enrollment at the University of Michigan and can be transferred to SAU as electives.  
 
AERO 101 Air Force Today I (1)  
Examines the growth and development of the USAF; covers Presidential, Secretary of Defense, and JCS roles in the 
defense posture, and the national and U.S. military strategic concepts; studies the USAF contribution to strategic 
offensive, defensive, and General Purpose Forces and USAF supporting forces. Compares the dynamics and interaction 
of all U.S. military forces in the General Purpose role and their cooperative efforts in the national security posture. 
 
AERO 102 Air Force Today II (1) 
A continuation of the study of the growth and development of the U.S. Air Force begun in AERO 101. The course 
relates the mission and responsibilities of the various Air Force major commands to the U.S. defense posture and the 
U.S. military strategy. Emphasis is placed on the Air Force contribution to General Purpose forces and the dynamics, 
interactions, and cooperative efforts of all the Services in the General Purpose role for the national security posture. 
Prerequisite: AERO 101. 
 
AERO 201 U.S. Aviation History and Its Development into Air Power I (1)  
This course traces the development of aviation from the 18th century — a time of balloons and dirigibles — to the 
present and examines how technology has affected the growth and development of air power. In addition, this course 
traces the use and development of air power through World War I and World War II, the Korean and Vietnamese 
conflicts, employment in relief missions and civic action programs in the late 1960s, and employment in military 
actions concluding with Desert Shield/Desert Storm.  
Prerequisite: AERO 102. 
 

 
 

 
 
AERO 202 U.S. Aviation History & Its Development into Air Power II (1)  
Examines the development of aviation from the 18th century, from balloons and dirigibles to the present, and how 
technology has affected growth and development of air power; traces use and development of air power through 
WW’s I and II, the Korean and Vietnamese conflicts, employment in relief missions and civic action programs in the 
late 1960s, and employment in military actions concluding with Desert Shield/Desert Storm.  
Prerequisite: AERO 201. 
 
AERO 310 Air Force Leadership and Management (3) 
Concepts, principles and techniques of leadership are presented within the framework of behavioral theories. 
Emphasis on the leader, group, situation and their interaction as dynamic factors in an organizational environment. 
Historical overview of managerial development with emphasis on the social and physical setting in which the manager 
operates. The curriculum includes effective communications, decision making, planning and strategic management. 
Prerequisite: AERO 202. 
 
AERO 311 Management and Air Force Application (3) 
An integrated management course emphasizing the concepts and skills required by the successful manager and 
leader. Organizational and personal values (ethics), management of change, organizational power, politics, and 
managerial strategy and tactics are discussed within the context of the military organization. Actual Air Force case 
studies are used throughout the course to enhance the learning and communication process (lecture and seminar). 
Prerequisite: AERO 310. 
 
AERO 410 National Security Forces in Contemporary American Society I (3) 
Focuses on the Armed Forces as an integral element of society. Provides examination of a broad range of American 
civil-military relations, and the environmental context in which defense policy is formulated. Special themes include: 
societal attitudes toward the military; the role of the professional military leader-manager in a democratic society; the 
fundamental values and socialization processes associated with the Armed Services; the requisites for maintaining 
adequate national security forces; policy, economic, and social constraints on the national defense structure; the 
impact of technological and international developments on strategic preparedness; the manifold variables involved in 
the formulation and implementation of national security policy. 
Prerequisite: AERO 311. 
 
AERO 411 National Security Forces in Contemporary American Society II (3) 
This course is a continuation of AERO 410 which examines the role of the military in contemporary American society. 
The course covers current issues affecting the military in the aftermath of the end of the Cold War and the lessons 
learned from the recent war in the Persian Gulf. Finally, AERO 411 prepares officer cadets for future active-duty 
services by explaining what is expected of them as professional military officers and how to prepare for the transition 
into the Air Force. Instruction is conducted via lecture and discussion. 
Prerequisite: AERO 410. 
 
APR (Advertising and Public Relations)  
 
APR 207 Advertising (3) (Spring) 
Explores principles and vocabulary of advertising including ethical and social implications. Examines theories of 
persuasion and mass media related to marketing and consumer behavior. Cross listed MKT 207.  
 
APR 309 Advertising Strategies (3) (Odd Falls) 
Examines principles, methods, techniques, and ethics of advertising in media. Emphasis is on the execution of 
research-based creative strategies. Cross listed MKT 309. 
 
APR 311 Corporate Communication (3) (Spring) 
Analyzes the role, function, development, and application of communication in the corporate setting including 
employee communication, work styles, gender issues, nonverbal, listening, interviewing, resume writing, leading 
meetings, performance appraisals, small group/team problem solving, and professional presentations. 
Prerequisites: ENG 104 College Writing, Gen. Ed. oral communication course (COM 212, SPE 100 or SPE 212). 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
APR 347 Public Relations (3) (Fall) 
Analysis of public relations principles, including public opinion, image creation, maintenance of press, and community 
and constituency relations; practice in public relations program recommendations and design. Cross listed MKT 347. 
 
ARA (Arabic) 
 
ARA 155A Elementary Arabic I (3) (Kelsey Language School in Jordan) 
Training in the elements of grammar, vocabulary acquisition, and pronunciation with practice in conversation.  
 
ARA 155B Elementary Arabic II (3) (Kelsey Language School in Jordan) 
Continuation of ARA 155A Elementary Arabic I.  
Prerequisite: ARA 155A Elementary Arabic I. 
 
ARA 255A Intermediate Arabic I (3) (Kelsey Language School in Jordan) 
Acquisition of extensive vocabulary; development of conversation and communicative skills and survey of essential 
grammatical structures.  
Prerequisite: ARA 155B Elementary Arabic II. 
 
ARA 255B Intermediate Arabic II (3) (Kelsey Language School in Jordan) 
Continuation of ARA 255A Intermediate Arabic I.  
Prerequisite: ARA 255A Intermediate Arabic I. 
 
ARA 355 Advanced Arabic and Culture Courses (3) (Kelsey Language School in Jordan) 
May be repeated. 
Prerequisite: ARA 255B Intermediate Arabic II. 
 
ART (Art) 
 
ART 152 Art Foundations (2) (Fall, Interim, Spring, Online) 
Introduces art ideas, basic concepts, skills, and materials used by artists in visual and tactile perception. Examines art 
in its historic relationship to religion, visual media's influence on contemporary living, and the need for critical thinking 
and analysis for enrichment of art and life. Not applicable to major or minor. 
 
ART 162 Drawing I (3) (Fall) 
Introduces drawing principles and techniques, including contour, gesture, modeling, and shading, are used to explore 
forms of still life, landscape, and architecture. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
 
ART 165 Two-Dimensional Design (3) (Fall) 
Studio-classroom approach to the elements and principles of design. Various two-dimensional techniques are 
explored in line, shape, space, and texture to prepare the student for advanced work in the various areas of the visual 
arts. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
 
ART 166 Three-Dimensional Design (4) (Even Springs) 
Studio-classroom approach to the elements and philosophy of design. Traditional and contemporary techniques are 
examined and practiced with special attention to developing personal creativity. Works are executed in clay, plaster, 
wood, and mixed media. "C" or better for media and visual arts majors. 
 
ART 167 Color (2) (Spring) 
Explores the visual element and concepts of color used in the visual arts. Emphasis on color theories, color 
manipulation and color organization used in both graphic and fine arts. Students begin with the traditional color 
wheel to classic painting concepts through current color technology. "C" or better for art and design majors. 
 
ART 205 Foundations of Photography (3) (Fall) 
Introduces the methods, theories, processes, and history of photography using both digital and analog platforms. 
 

 
 

 
 
ART 213 Painting I (3) (Odd Falls) 
Introduces major techniques of painting and a full range of painting media and stylistic modes. Focuses on oil-based 
media. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisites: ART 162 Drawing I, ART 165 Two-Dimensional Design, ART 167 Color. 
 
ART 263 Drawing II (4) (Spring) 
Introduces principles of figure drawing with emphasis on anatomy, structure, form and articulation while working with 
different human subjects. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
 
ART 272 Introduction to Graphic Design (4) (Fall) 
Introduces the art of graphic design and its historical development and basic styles. Exposure to current software in 
relation to basic layout construction and design. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
 
ART 274 Graphic Design I (4) (Spring) 
Focuses on developing aptitude in graphic design work using current graphic design software. Explores basic terms, 
concepts, processes, and tools in contemporary design. Instruction in preparing art for reproduction, visual problem 
solving, and communication. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisite: ART 272 Introduction to Graphic Design. 
 
ART 306 Tools and Techniques of Photography (3) (Spring) 
Intermediate level examination of cameras, lighting, and photographic vision using digital and analog platforms. 
Prerequisite: ART 205 Foundations of Photography. 
 
ART 314 Painting II (4) (Limited) 
A continuation of ART 213 with emphasis upon a variety of media. Students are encouraged to experiment in new 
directions through the combination of various painting media with other two- or three-dimensional techniques. "C" or 
better for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisite: ART 213 Painting I. 
 
ART 320 History of Modern Art (3) (Fall) 
Examines major changes in the art world during the Modern and Post-Modern eras in relation to the primary artists, 
art pieces and movements. Explores the major Modern art movements such as Cubism, Futurism, Surrealism, Abstract 
Expressionism, and Pop Art, among others, as well as significant artists of the Modern era such as Pablo Picasso and 
Andy Warhol. Focuses on philosophical and theological changes reflected in modern art. 
 
ART 326 History of Art: Renaissance to 19th Century Western Art (3) (Even Springs) 
Explores the history of art from the 14th century through the 19th century. 
 
ART 333 Graphic Design II (4) (Fall) 
Analyzes advanced problems in layout and design technique for advertising art using current design software as a tool 
to prepare work for publication, and photo manipulation and retouching. Emphasis on the importance of qualitative 
and aesthetic standards in the graphic arts. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisite: ART 274 Graphic Design I. 
 
ART 334 Graphic Design III (3) (Spring) 
Students design and prepare a graphic design/artwork portfolio to present as a career tool. Emphasis on visual 
problem solving for artistic and commercial applications. "C" or better for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisite: ART 333 Graphic Design II. 
 
ART 335 Web Design (3) (Even Springs) 
A comprehensive study of Web design and multimedia, including the evolution of the Internet and its corresponding 
terms in relation to visual presentation. Students apply design elements from concept and design to preparation and 
production. Explores techniques for Web functionality and Web animation. "C" or better for media and visual arts 
department majors. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ART 376 Typography (3) (Even Falls) 
Training in type design and layout, including the study of rules and conventions of design and a brief history of type 
styles in use today. 
 
ART 406 Portrait and Commercial Photography (3) (Odd Falls) 
An exploration of techniques and equipment used in portrait and commercial photography, both in studio and on 
location. 
Prerequisite: ART 306 Tools and Techniques of Photography. 
 
ART 415 Advanced Practice (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Continued work in two- or three-dimensional design, including drawing, printmaking, painting, sculpture, ceramics, 
graphic design, and mixed media. Emphasis on individual direction and goals. "C" or better for media and visual arts 
department majors. Repeatable up to two times.  
 
ART 416 Portfolio (3) (As recommended) 
Students who do not pass ART 415 with a C" or better or who are unprepared for ART 470 may be required to take the 
Portfolio course. Special emphasis on fundamental design and creative problem solving within the student’s 
concentration. Aids students in portfolio compilation that meets departmental standards. Taking or passing ART 416 
does not exclude a student from taking ART 470. "C" for media and visual arts department majors. 
Prerequisite: ART 415 Advanced Practice. 
 
ART 436 Photography Portfolio (2) (Even Springs) 
Individualized advanced projects in photography with an emphasis on the process involved in generating a portfolio of 
images, a coherent body of work based upon a theme, concept, style or selected subject matter.  
Prerequisite: ART 306 Tools and Techniques of Photography 
 
ART 470 Art Seminar (1) (Spring) 
Requires resume preparation; evidence of submission in a regional and national competition; a digital portfolio; and 
an 8- to 10-page paper covering the student’s philosophy of art. Includes job interviews or application to graduate 
schools relative to pursuing work in art or furthering one’s education. Graded "S"/"U." Seniors only. 
 
ART 471 Senior Art Exhibition (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Students prepare and exhibit a body of high-quality work related to their emphasis. The exhibition process develops 
skills, attitudes, and values needed for success in graduate study in visual art and professional careers. A show 
statement and promotional materials will be submitted. The senior exhibition must be hung within one semester after 
completing ART 470 Art Seminar. Graded "S"/"U." A senior art exhibition may qualify for honors.  
 
ASI (AuSable Institute) 
ASI courses are administered through the AuSable Institute. Real-time course listings and descriptions are found at www.ausable.org. 
 
ASI 301 Land and Water Resources (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
Systems-level perspective on landforms, hydrology and ecosystems. Analysis and interpretation of map and field data, 
remote sensing data derived from satellites and aircraft, and geographic information systems (GIS), including field 
trips to and analysis of earth surface process and landforms of glaciers, soils, lakeshores, rivers and groundwater. 
Includes application to policy and land use planning.  
Prerequisite: one year of introductory science. 
 
ASI 302 Lake Ecology and Management (4) (Great Lakes, Summer II) 
Field study of lakes and other freshwater systems with applications to planning and management, including an 
introduction to limnology and investigation of representative lakes, streams, and wetlands of the region. Compares 
the North American Great Lakes and their stewardship with other great lakes of the world. 
Recommended: one year of general biology and one year of general chemistry. 
 
ASI 303 Ecological Agriculture (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
Focuses on development of agricultural systems to better resemble natural ecosystems to achieve food for 

 
 

 
 
communities, vibrant economies, and healthy ecosystems. Focuses on agricultural principles applied in rural, urban, 
temperate, and tropical settings, and issues of justice, public policy, and other difficult, practical, and ethical issues.  
 
ASI 304 International Development and Environmental Sustainability (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
 
Principles of sustainable development, examining ecological sustainability and sustainable society in the context of 
various factors that are bringing environmental degradation and impoverishment to people and cultures. Addresses 
problems associated with tropical agriculture, hunger, poverty, international debt, appropriate technology, relief 
programs, missionary earth-keeping, conservation of wild nature, land tenure, and land stewardship and the 
resolution of practical and ethical issues associated with these problems. Classroom and field settings. 
 
ASI 310 Environmental Law and Policy (4) (May Online) 
Analysis of the policy-making process at local, national, and international scales with examination of environmental 
policy challenges including climate change, resource management, and energy development. Students will interact 
with regional policymakers and land managers in the field to consider linkages between policy and science and ways 
for science to inform the policy-making process. Considers environmental ethics, environmental justice, and 
environmental advocacy. 
 
ASI 311 Field Botany (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
Field and lab identification, systematics, natural history, and ecology of vascular plants as components of natural 
communities and their relationships to ecological features, including stratification, history, plant zonation, adaptation, 
and animal interactions are examined. Explores relationships of plant families and higher groups are covered.  
Prerequisite: one year of general biology or one semester of botany. 
 
ASI 318 Marine Biology (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
Biology of marine plants and animals in the field. The focus of the course is on intertidal life and marine ecology in 
oceanic and geophysical context. Includes trophic dynamic relationships of eel grass communities and the intertidal 
zone, workings of the island systems of Puget Sound, ecological roles of sea birds and fishes, population and 
community structure dynamics, exploitation and oceanic microbialization, and biogeochemical processes and their 
linkages with the biosphere. Examines marine stewardship and effects of human activity on the marine environment. 
 
ASI 321 Animal Ecology (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
Interrelationships between animals and their biotic and physical environments, emphasizing animal population and 
community dynamics. A field course that centers on the ecology of northern Michigan fauna from a field biology 
perspective with an emphasis on stewardship. Included are individual student projects.  
Prerequisite: one year of introductory science. 
 
ASI 322 Aquatic Biology (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
Ecology, identification, systematics, culture, and care of aquatic plants and animals, and adaptations to freshwater 
environments as determined by direct investigation in lakes, ponds, bogs, marshes, streams, and in the laboratory. 
Assesses human impacts on aquatic species and ecosystems, presents procedures for the stewardship of aquatic 
habitats, and introduces aquatic restoration ecology.  
Prerequisite: one year of general biology or one semester each of general zoology and general botany. 
 
ASI 342 Fish Ecology and Management (4) (Great Lakes, Summer II) 
Introduces the relation between freshwater fish and their environments in lakes and streams. Examines techniques 
and technologies employed to manage populations and species for conservation, recreational use, and commercial 
harvest; freshwater fish taxonomy and phylogenetic relationship; habitat requirements of major fish species by life 
stages; stream habitat assessment; population measuring and monitoring; strategies for management of recreational 
and commercial species; and conservation of threatened and endangered species. 
 
ASI 343 Sustainability, Tropical Agriculture, and Missions (4) (Costa Rica, May) 
Introduces sustainability and tropical agriculture with applications for working with resource-poor farmers. Includes 
the scientific basis of low-cost techniques, tropical crops and their requirements, issues in Christian missions and 
development, urban gardening, and small animal techniques in the context of agricultural employment and economy. 
Includes several trips to different ecosystem regions of Costa Rica. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ASI 345 Wildlife Ecology (4) (Great Lakes, Summer II) 
Ecology, conservation, and stewardship of wildlife and their habitats. Includes examination of growth and structure 
of populations, environmental and human social factors affecting wildlife communities, and theories and applications 
of wildlife conservation. Set in the context of the historical development of the field from management to ecology to 
the land ethic of Leopold. Includes management and stewardship of non-game and endangered species, and long-
term prospects of wildlife in changing environmental, climatic, and social contexts. 
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology or permission. 
 
ASI 358 Field Techniques in Wetlands (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
A comprehensive overview of wetland ecosystem processes, values, legislation and quantification. Students will learn 
to evaluate and quantify soils, hydrologic status and vegetation in a variety of wetland ecosystems including bogs, 
emergent marshes, forested wetlands and wetlands converted for agriculture, and to apply tools developed by the US 
Army Corps of Engineers and MI Dept. of Environmental Quality to assess wetland extent and habitat quality.  
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and BIO 112 Introductory Biology II. 
 
ASI 359 Marine Mammals (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
Biology, behavior, ecology, identification, and marine mammals' conservation. Covers some major habitats in Puget 
Sound and the Salish Sea, with attention to the diving physiology, social behavior, and communications of whales and 
seals. Aims to develop a stewardship perspective rooted in biological principles and directed at the global 
conservation of marine mammals and their ecosystems. Special attention cultures of the region and current issues. 
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and BIO 112 Introductory Biology II, and a semester of anatomy and 
physiology is recommended.  
 
ASI 361 Field Biology in Spring (4) (Great Lakes, May) 
A field-based introduction to the natural history of northern Michigan and its plants and animals, including their field 
identification, field biology, behavior, and landscape context, with a focus on spring activity of biological communities.  
 
ASI 362 Environmental Applications for GIS (4) (Great Lakes, Summer II) 
Theory and application of spatial analysis for applied social and ecological problem solving. Combines GPS field data 
collection; ArcGIS use for storage, processing, interpretation, and presentation of data; location and integration of 
existing source information; and remote-sensing integration with GIS applications. Designed around an environmental 
project to apply GIS techniques for real-world problem-solving in protecting and restoring ecosystems. 
 
ASI 365 Insect Ecology (4) (Great Lakes, May) 
Ecology, systematics, life history, and behavior of terrestrial and aquatic insects with an emphasis on field 
identification skills while exploring a variety of local habitats and considering the roles of insects in pollination, 
decomposition, herbivory, predation, and pathogen transmission. Explores the use of insects in citizen science, 
including participation in the MiCorps stream monitoring program that provides familiarity with stream sampling and 
macroinvertebrate communities. 
 
ASI 368 Forest Ecology (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
Studies the abiotic environment, species interactions, and ecosystem processes in contrasting forest ecosystems of 
the Pacific Northwest including lowland temperate rain forests, montane forests on the slopes of the Cascades, and 
sub alpine parkland near tree line in the Olympics. Introduces quantitative research approaches relevant to forest 
systems including data collection, management, and basic analysis.  
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and BIO 112 Introductory Biology II. 
 
ASI 371 Forest Management (4) (Great Lakes, May) 
Introduction to site-level, landscape, and multistakeholder approaches to forest management, including strategies of 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. Theory, application, and techniques of forest management for specified 
values and objectives, including instrumental (economic/utilitarian and life support such as wood production, habitat 
and watershed protection, and climate moderation) and non-instrumental values (such as aesthetic, moral/spiritual 
values, e.g. recreation). Addresses the evolution of forest management and some specific practices, methods, and 
techniques of growing trees and the development and care of forests (silviculture) as applied to natural forests. 

ASI 471 Conservation Biology (4) (Great Lakes, Summer I) 
Conservation biology principles with applications to sustainable human society and biospheric integrity. An integrative 
approach to biology and society that interrelates population biology, ecological principles, biogeochemical cycles, 
ecosystem functions, and human society in the context of biospheric degradation. Develops a stewardship perspective 
rooted in biological principles and directed at conservation of plant and animal species, biotic communities, 
ecosystems, and human society. Included are topics of human development, poverty, and economic growth.  
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and BIO 112 Introductory Biology II, and one course in ecology. 
 
ASI 478 Alpine Ecology (4) (Pacific Rim, Summer II) 
Ecology of the mountains of the Pacific Northwest, with particular attention to adaptation of plant and animal life to 
montane climates and altitudes, and analysis and interpretation of altitudinal zonation of biotic communities with 
applications to latitudinal biogeography. Includes topics of physiological responses of organisms to reduced oxygen 
levels, low temperatures, and high-altitude radiation regimes. Field work in the Olympic Mountains. 
 
ASI 482 Restoration Ecology (4) (Great Lakes, Summer II) 
Ecological principles for ecosystem restoration and applications for restoring degraded and endangered species. Field 
studies include analysis of restoration and rehabilitation work with the Kirtland’s warbler, an officially designated wild 
river, coastal dunes, kettle-hole bogs, deforested lands, degraded residential and farming sites, and abandoned oil 
wells. A practical field lab is included in which techniques are applied to a specific site.  
Prerequisite: one year of biology and one course in ecology or field biology, or permission of instructor. 
 

AUD 174 Radio Production (3) (Even Falls) 
Examines day-to-day operations of a radio station. Introduces principles of station management and promotion, and 
techniques used to write, produce, and perform various types of programming for live and voice-tracked broadcasts. 
 
AUD 302 Introduction to Podcasting (1) (Odd Interims) 
Students create and distribute a podcast. Emphasis on identifying theme, writing dynamic copy, interviewing and 
using mechanics of production including audio editing and mixing. Required access to audio editing software. 
 
AUD 321 Sound Design (3) (Odd Falls) 
A concentrated study of the science of sound and audio in both live and studio settings. Explores concepts of 
microphone construction, design and placement, acoustics, mixing, equalizing, recording and sound editing for film, 
video and live events. Emphasis on practical, hands-on application of audio recording principles and practices.  
 
BIB (Biblical Studies) 
 
BIB 217 Survey of the Old Testament (3) (Fall, Interim, Spring, Online) 
Surveys the Old Testament as a collection of sacred Jewish and Christian texts, as divine revelation, and as a source for 
spiritual formation and ministry, focusing especially on the ways these texts depict God, the identity and destiny of 
humankind, and the role of the community of faith in God’s redemptive work in the world. Introduces critical 
approaches to interpretation of the Old Testament. Considers and emphasizes how to faithfully embody these texts.  
 
BIB 218 Survey of the New Testament (3) (Fall, Interim, Spring, Online) 
Surveys the New Testament, focusing on the presentation of Jesus Christ, his life, his message and his church. 
Examines the New Testament as a collection of 1st century documents of the Early Church, as the revelation of God, 
and as a source for spiritual formation and ministry. Introduces critical approaches to the interpretation of the New 
Testament. Considers and emphasizes how to faithfully embody these texts.  
 
BIB 220 Biblical Interpretation (3) (Spring) 
Introduces interpretation of the Bible as the Church’s Scriptures using a variety of ecclesial lenses (encompassing 
patristic, medieval, Reformation, critical, and post-critical contributions). Students develop initial skills in the inductive 
study of biblical texts, in the larger process of biblical exegesis, and in the engagement of biblical texts as part of the 
Church’s ongoing theological reflection and practice. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
BIB 302 Old Testament Historical Books (3) (Even Interims) 
An exegetical study of Joshua through Esther as part of the Church’s Scriptures. Specific emphasis on the development 
of interpretation skills of these predominantly narrative materials; critical issues that arise from this particular genre; 
and the role of these biblical texts in the Church’s ongoing theological reflection.  
 
BIB 303 Prophets and Politics (3) (Even Springs) 
An exegetical study of selected books in the Old Testament corpus of major and minor prophets as part of the 
Church’s Scriptures. Specific emphasis on interpretation skills of these biblical texts; critical issues that arise from this 
particular genre; and the role of these texts in the Church’s ongoing theological reflection and Christian witness.  
 
BIB 304 Genesis: Creation and Fall (3) (Odd Springs) 
Focuses on the book of Genesis as part of the Church’s Scripture. Attention given to presuppositions and 
interpretative methodologies (such as historical, literary, and canonical criticism). Emphasis on the text’s significant 
theological contributions to Christian teachings about God, humanity, creation and salvation.  
 
BIB 308 History of the Bible: Origins, Development and Canon (3) (Odd Falls) 
Examines the production and transmission of written materials in the ancient world. Focuses on the strengths and 
weaknesses of Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek as vehicles of written communication. Evaluates and compares the 
various theories of canonization and examines the historical process by which they occurred. Includes principles of 
text criticism, text assessment, and decision-making related to various translations. Explores guidance in choosing 
biblical versions, identifying landmarks in the history of biblical translation, and issues of the current debate.  
 
BIB 313 Four Gospels; One Jesus (3) (Even Springs) 
An exegetical and theological study of the four canonical Gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Analyzes the 
unique nature and character of each Gospel while affirming the unity of their presentation of Christ. Emphasis on 
current critical approaches and the role of these texts in the Church’s on-going theological reflection, preaching, 
teaching, and practice. Addresses critical issues arising out of careful study of these biblical texts, such as the synoptic 
problem, the unique nature of the gospel of John, and the question of the historical Jesus. 
 
BIB 333 Paul: Preacher, Pastor, and Theologian (3) (Odd Springs) 
An exegetical study of selected letters of the Pauline corpus. Emphasis on current critical approaches to these letters, 
to the development of skills in the interpretation of these and other letters, and to the role of these texts in the 
Church’s ongoing theological reflection. Addresses critical issues arising out of the careful study of these texts, such as 
authorship questions, influences on the life of Paul, and the relationship of these letters to the materials in Acts. 
 
BIB 342 Hebrew History and Geography (3-4) (Limited) 
Normally, a travel seminar to Israel during interim, includes archaeology. On campus, a study of the historical books of 
the Old Testament and intertestamental Jewish history. Cross listed GEO 342, HIS 342. 
 
BIB 403 History of Biblical Interpretation and Criticism: 1750-1950 (3) (Odd Springs) 
See HIS 403. 
 
BIB 404 Biblical Wisdom and Postmodern Culture (3) (Even Falls) 
The exegetical study of texts from the Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs to assess the canonical 
role and theological contributions of these materials within the life of the Church. Considers perspectives on reality 
which these materials offer, as well as attendant implications for Christian doctrine, ethics, and spiritual formation. 
 
BIB 407 Revelation, Eschatology, and the End of the World (3) (Even Falls) 
An exegetical, historical, and theological study of the Revelation (or Apocalypse) of John. Surveys apocalyptic texts in 
the Old Testament, the Intertestamental period, and the Gospels in order to provide an interpretive framework for 
reading the Revelation. Broadly considers the topic of eschatology (study of the end times) with emphasis on the 2nd 
Temple Jewish eschatology, early Christian eschatology, and contemporary understandings of the end of the world. 
 
BIB 408 The Bible in Global Perspectives (3) (Odd Falls) 
Addresses key issues in contemporary readings of the Bible, drawing upon hermeneutical and theological tools, and 

 
 

 
 
explores biblical interpretation and theological development of the church in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and among 
minority communities in the West. Enables students to engage with global perspectives on Christian faith and practice 
and foster their skills as Bible interpreters and theologians.  
 
BIB 484 Seminar in Bible (3) (Limited) 
Advanced seminar in Bible, offering exegetical study of selected texts. Even years will focus on Old Testament; odd 
years will focus on New Testament. Students hone interpretive, research, presentation, and/or teaching skills through 
assignments such as interpretive projects, research papers, critical book reviews, and in-class presentations (including, 
but not limited to, leading the seminar). Students who know biblical languages are encouraged to engage the Bible in 
its original language. Recommended for students planning to pursue graduate studies. 
 
BIO (Biology) 
 
BIO 100 Principles of Biology (4) (Fall) 
Introduces the non-biology major to the entire field of biology. Introduces basic concepts and facts of biology, the 
methods by which this information is gained, and the issues that arise with the development and use of these facts 
and concepts. Does not count toward major or minor. Includes lab.  
Corequisite: BIO 100L. 
 
BIO 101 Principles of Human Biology (3) (Online) 
A survey course covering the basic principles of human biology including cells, metabolism, basic human anatomy and 
physiology, human impacts on the environment, and the science behind such topics as diet, alcohol and drug abuse, 
smoking, common human diseases, and pollution. For site or online students only. Students in main campus programs 
may petition to register for this course, but petitions will be granted for only extreme circumstances. Includes lab. 
 
BIO 111 Introductory Biology I (4) (Fall) 
A survey of organismal biology, anatomy, physiology, energetics, cell structure, phylogeny, ecology, and 
environmental biology. Includes lab. 
Corequisite: BIO 111L. 
 
BIO 112 Introductory Biology II (4) (Spring) 
A survey of the cellular, molecular, and genetic bases of life. Includes lab. 
Corequisite: BIO 112L. 
 
BIO 170 Freshman Seminar in Biology (1) (Fall) 
Introduces requirements for success in biology with academic and vocational focus. Uses guest speakers and 
seminars. Emphasizes skills in scientific writing style and the evaluation of scientific claims. 
 
BIO 206 Genes and Speciation (3) (Limited) 
Introduces evolutionary biology. Basic population genetics and discussions of how selection, migration, mutation, and 
genetic drift affect Hardy-Weinberg equilibria. Examines speciation, the history of life on earth, and Christian 
responses to the origins debate. 
 
BIO 232 Microbiology for Nurses (3) (Fall) 
Essential structure and function of microorganisms with focus on recent advances in medical microbiology, pathogens, 
disease control, and natural and artificial immunity. Includes Lab. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II and CHE 142 General Organic Biochemistry. 
Corequisite: BIO 232L 
 
BIO 234 Pathophysiology for Nurses (3) (Spring) 
Examines why certain diseases affect physical appearance; medication effectiveness, side effects, and reasons for 
complications; and how pathophysiology forms the rationale for evidence-based medicine.  "B-" or better required. 
 Prerequisites: BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II, and CHE 142 General Organic Biochemistry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
BIO 236 Pharmacology for Nurses (3) (Spring) 
Introduces the principles of pharmacology, including pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, mediation interactions, 
and potential adverse medication reactions. Emphasizes how drug classifications and nursing care relate to the safe 
administration of medication to patients across the lifespan. "B-" or better required. 
 
BIO 261 Human Anatomy/Lab (4) (Spring) 
A detailed study of the human organism at the cellular, tissue, and organ system levels. The relationship between 
structure and function is covered with emphasis on structural relationships. Laboratory study includes microscope 
work along with substantial organ and animal dissection.  
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I. 
Corequisite: BIO 261L. 
 
BIO 262 Genetics for Nurses (3) (Spring) 
Genetic bases for health and disease. Basic genetic principles with applications to health care and the future of 
medicine. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: BIO 232 Microbiology for Nurses. 
 
BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I/Lab (4) (Fall) 
First in a two-course series. Essential elements of basic biology plus detailed study of anatomy and physiology. 
Examines each system of the body regarding both structure and function. Special emphasis placed on medical and 
health applications of class material. Material to be covered: essentials of biology (cellular and molecular basics), 
human cells and tissues, integumentary system, skeletal system, muscular system, nervous system, and endocrine 
system. Includes lab with histology and dissection. "B-" or better required for nursing majors. 
Corequisite: BIO 264L.  
 
BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II/Lab (4) (Spring) 
Second in a two-course series. Continues the study of the structure and function of the body. Material to be covered: 
excretory system, reproductive system, cardiovascular system, immune system, lymphatic system, respiratory system, 
and digestive system. Includes lab. "B-" or better required for nursing majors. 
Prerequisite: BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I/Lab. 
Corequisite: BIO 265L.  
 
BIO 281 Environmental Science (4) (Fall, Spring) 
Current global and local environmental problems and concerns are examined. Scientific bases of problems and possible 
solutions are included. Topics include atmospheric pollution, population, energy, solid waste, toxic waste, water and 
others. A biblical stewardship approach is integrated with course context. Includes lab.  
Corequisite: BIO 281L. 
 
BIO 305 Principles of Genetics (4) (Fall) 
Introduces the underlying concepts in genetics. Includes a detailed study of Mendelian inheritance patterns in a 
variety of organisms; an introduction to human genetic diseases; the genetic control of development; the genetics of 
populations; and evolution. Includes lab. 
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I or BIO 112 Introductory Biology II. 
Corequisite: BIO 305L.  
 
BIO 321 Parasitology (4) (Odd Springs) 
Structure, life history, and effects on the host of various parasitic animals. Laboratory examination and demonstration 
of hosts and parasites. Includes lab. 
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I. 
 
BIO 330 Plant Organismal Biology (4) (Odd Falls) 
Studies of photosynthetic life, particularly plants, at the organismal level, including how mankind and society have 
been, are, and will be dependent upon photosynthetic organisms, the recognition, classification, and geographic 
distribution of plants, and the ecological impact and roles of photosynthetic life. Includes lab and field studies. 
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and BIO 112 Introductory Biology II. 

 
 

 
 
BIO 342 Vertebrate Zoology (4) (Even Springs) 
Lecture, laboratory, and field work in collection, identification, distribution, and environmental relationship of 
Michigan vertebrates. Includes comparative anatomy and physiology. Includes lab. Requires a long weekend field trip 
with some strenuous activities.  
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I. 
 
BIO 345 Plant Cellular and Molecular Biology (4) (Limited) 
Introduction to and application of the theories, concepts, and techniques of cellular and molecular biology directed 
towards the study of photosynthetic life. Integrates discussion and analyses of basic and applied biological research 
techniques, biotechnological systems, phytoremediation efforts, and medical/pharmaceutical applications involving 
photosynthetic organisms, particularly plants. Includes lab.  
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I, BIO 112 Introductory Biology II, and CHE 111 General Chemistry I, and junior 
standing or instructor’s permission. 
 
BIO 352 Microbiology (4) (Spring) 
A comprehensive study of microorganisms including importance, diversity, metabolism, growth, control, genetics, 
host microbe interaction, immunity, and disease. Laboratory work supplements lecture and affords practice in 
identification, cultivation, and observation of microorganism.  
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I, BIO 112 Introductory Biology II, and CHE 111 General Chemistry I, or 
instructor’s permission. 
Corequisite: BIO 352L. 
 
BIO 362 Principles of Ecology (4) (Fall) 
A study of the components and interrelationships of the components of ecosystems. Topics include biotic-abiotic 
interaction, biotic-biotic interactions, species diversity, population ecology, species distribution, biogeochemistry, 
ecological change, and community ecosystem patterns and distribution. Includes lab. 
Prerequisite: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I or BIO 112 Introductory Biology II. 
Corequisite: BIO 362L. 
 
BIO 365 Introduction to Pharmacology (3) (Spring) 
Introduces pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and basic dosing theory. Survey of anti-hypertensives, lipid-
lowering drugs, pharmacology regarding coronary artery disease and angina pectoralis, diuretics, asthma 
management, anti-inflammatory drugs, sympathomimetic drugs, and management of diabetes mellitus. Case studies, 
readings, and class discussion. Medical terminology appropriate to the preceding topics. Cross listed HES 365. 
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I, CHE 101 Introductory Chemistry, and junior standing. 
 
BIO 401 Cell Biology (3) (Odd Falls) 
Advanced topics in cellular biology. Examines the structure in relation to the function of subcellular organelles of 
eukaryotic cells. Includes a survey of the current pertinent scientific literature.  
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I, BIO 112 Introductory Biology II, and CHE 112 General Chemistry II. 
 
BIO 404 Human Physiology (4) (Even Falls, Even Springs) 
A study of the function of organ systems as they relate to the human organism survival in its environment. Includes 
study of the digestive, circulatory, respiratory, sensory, and endocrine systems, plus specialized topics. Includes lab.  
Prerequisites: BIO 261 Human Anatomy or BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I, and junior standing. 
Corequisite: BIO 404L.  
 
BIO 406 Molecular Genetics (4) (Even Springs) 
Examines the molecular understanding of genes including gene structure and expression, structure and replication of 
DNA, organization of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes, the role of genes in the development in the generation of 
immune diversity, and the role of oncogenes in cancer. Includes lab.  
Prerequisites: BIO 305 Principles of Genetics and junior standing. 
Corequisite: BIO 406L. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
BIO 440 Research in Biology and Chemistry (3) 
See CHE 440. 
 
BIO 458 Human Development (4) (Limited) 
Introduces developmental biology using human embryology and development as a model. Topics include fertilization, 
cleavage, compaction, gastrulation, primary and embryonic fields, limb development, neurulation, the development 
of mesodermal derivatives, germ cell development and human stem cells. Includes lab. 
Prerequisites: BIO 111 Introductory Biology I and junior standing.  
Corequisite: BIO 458L. 
 
BIO 472 Biological Chemistry I (5) (Even Falls) 
Introduction to the chemistry of life. Topics include structure and function of lipids and membranes; amino acids and 
proteins; sugars and polysaccharides; mechanisms of enzyme action; carbohydrate metabolism; oxidative 
phosphorylation and photosynthesis; lipid metabolism. Includes lab. Cross listed CHE 472. 
Prerequisite: CHE 201 Organic Chemistry I. 
Corequisite: BIO/CHE 472L.  
 
BIO 473 Biological Chemistry II (4) (Odd Springs) 
Continuation of BIO 472. Topics include amino acid metabolism; hormonal regulation of metabolism; nucleotide 
metabolism; nucleic acid structure and function; DNA replication, transcription and translation; gene regulation; blood 
biochemistry; and hormone mechanism of action. Includes lab. Cross listed CHE 473. 
Prerequisite: BIO/CHE 472 Biological Chemistry I. 
Corequisite: BIO/CHE 473L. 
 
BIO 480 Senior Seminar (2) (Fall) 
Advanced studies in selected biological topics. Course design relates the concepts of biology to contemporary, 
historical, technological, societal, and ethical issues. Lectures, current journal readings, library research, student 
presentations, and discussion aid in developing inquiry techniques and critical thinking. 
 
BUS (Business) 
 
BUS 100, 200, 300, 400 Servant Leadership in Practice I, II, III, IV (1) (Limited) 
Application of team building, communication and leadership skills through participation in outreach projects in the 
community. Examines servant leadership and acquisition of project management skills. Spring enrollees may 
participate in the Enactus Regional Competition where they present their projects to a panel of judges. Students enroll 
according to their class standing. Freshmen and sophomores will enroll in BUS 100 and BUS 200, respectively, and so 
on. Graded "S"/"U." 
 
BUS 103 Introduction to the Business Environment (2) (Embedded H.S. Course) 
An overview of the business environment, including the functional areas of a business and how they work together. 
Designed to be paired with a work-study program which allows students exposure within the workplace. Offered only 
as an embedded dual enrollment course at high schools. 
 
BUS 107 Foundations of Leadership and Ethics (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Examines the lives of great leaders, including biblical figures, through reading leadership literature and practicing 
leadership skills. The course especially benefits those going into business but will also be useful to all interested in 
being "critically involved in the affairs of the contemporary world." Business ethics is a key component of the course. 
 
BUS 162 Business Computer Applications (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Introduces business computer applications which include, but are not limited to, Excel and PowerPoint to enhance 
students’ analytical and presentation skills.  
 
BUS 232 Business Seminar (1) (Fall, Spring) 
A seminar course to engage students on topics where Judeo-Christian values, the liberal arts, economics, and current 
events overlap to prepare students to operate from a biblical foundation in a largely secular business world.  

 
 

 
 
BUS 271 Business Law I (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Introduces the interrelationship of law and business with the intent of establishing a knowledge- and skill-base upon 
which students can build an understanding of our legal system and an ability to recognize and manage legal issues 
that arise in day-to-day business contexts. Examines the American legal system, the U.S. Constitution, litigation and 
alternative dispute resolution, jurisprudence, business ethics, relevant tort and criminal law, and contract law.  
 
BUS 272 Solutions Seminar (1) (Limited) 
Introduces leadership and management principles through reading and listening to the accounts of outstanding 
practitioners. Practical application and written report included.  
 
BUS 301 Money and Banking (3)  
See FIN 301. 
 
BUS 325 Principles of Management (3) (Fall) 
The general nature and functions of organization and management in society. 
 
BUS 351 Statistics (3) (Fall) 
Introduces statistics for business majors. Covers principles in descriptive and inferential statistics. Primary focus on 
integrating statistics into business problem-solving. Surveys strategies for problem-sensing, diagnosis, and decision 
making through careful collection, organization, and interpretation of appropriate data. Also covers research design: 
research process, research methodology, data collection and sampling techniques, and instrument design. 
Prerequisites: MAT 101 College Algebra, MAT 104 Math for Liberal Arts, or 2 years of H.S. algebra with a "B" or better. 
 
BUS 354 Statistical Applications for Business (1) (Fall) 
Explores statistical applications for business. Hands-on experience, conducting a satisfaction survey study that lends 
itself to the use of quantitative data analysis including but not limited to graphical presentation of data, comparison of 
population means, correlation, and regression analysis covered in an introductory statistics course. 
 
BUS 371 Organizational Behavior Management (3) 
See PSY 371. 
 
BUS 372 Business Law II (3) (Even Springs) 
Builds upon the foundation of Business Law I and covers the law of enterprise organization (primarily corporations, 
partnerships, LLCs and agency law). Several Uniform Commercial Code Articles (sales, negotiable instruments, secured 
transactions), personal property and bailments, and insurance.  
Prerequisite: BUS 271 Business Law I. 
 
BUS 403 Argument and Persuasion for Business (3) (Fall) 
Focuses on argument (claims and support), persuasion (how and why individuals or groups are influenced to act or 
believe in a particular way) and negotiation (interest-based persuasion), as these topics pertain to business. Contexts 
for argumentation will include economics, finance, marketing, management, public relations, business ethics, business 
law, business and government relations, and strategic management.  
 
BUS 424 Strategic Management (4) (Spring) 
Capstone course. Examines the strategic planning and management process from the perspective of the top-level 
executive or consultant. Integrates and draws upon previously acquired business knowledge and management skills to 
apply to various business cases and projects. Also addresses ethics, leadership, marketing, management, 
organizational structure, finance, operations, social responsibility, competition, and government and international 
relations, as they affect strategic decision making at the corporate, business, and functional levels of the organization.  
Prerequisites: BUS 325 Principles of Management, FIN 362 Principles of Finance, and MKT 221 Marketing Principles. 
 
BUS 426 Operations and Supply Chain Management (3) (Even Falls) 
Introduces the challenges of complex production/operations systems and the array of contemporary tools currently 
employed to meet those challenges. Examines current theory and modeling techniques used by real organizations.  
Prerequisite: junior standing. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
BUS 432 Human Resources Management and Supervision (3) (Spring) 
Analyzes and applies principles and practices related to human resource planning, recruitment, selection, utilization, 
and labor relations. Special attention on the legal environment and management and human resources supervisory 
issues. Covers human resource management functions in organizations of various sizes. 
 
BUS 435 Business and Government (3) (Spring) 
Examines the relationship between business and government including a study of the U.S. Constitution and the basis 
for and the limits upon government regulation of business; the history and current impact of government policy on 
business through direct regulation such as antitrust law, consumer protection law, employment, safety, 
environmental, and civil rights regulation; the influence of government on business through indirect action such as 
foreign trade and foreign investment policy, fiscal and monetary policy, entitlement and defense spending and 
taxation; and strategic responses of business to these policies.  
Prerequisites: BUS 271 Business Law I, BUS 403 Argument and Persuasion for Business and one ECN course. 
 
BUS 472 Solutions Seminar (1) (Limited) 
Examines leadership and management principles by reading and listening to the accounts of outstanding practitioners. 
Practical application and written report included.  
 
CHE (Chemistry) 
 
CHE 101 Introductory Chemistry (4) (Spring) 
Introduces major and foundational aspects of chemistry as it applies to life and the universe. Includes lab.  
Corequisite: CHE 101L. 
 
CHE 111 General Chemistry I (4) (Fall, Spring) 
Survey of the fundamental principles of chemistry. Stoichiometry, atomic and molecular structure bonding, kinetic 
molecular theory, and elementary thermodynamics are discussed. Includes lab.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in MAT 101 College Algebra or SAT math test sub-score of 26. 
Corequisite: CHE 111L. 
 
CHE 112 General Chemistry II (4) (Spring) 
A continuation of CHE 111 General Chemistry I. A study of the gas laws, chemical kinetics, equilibrium theory, acid-
base chemistry, thermodynamics, and electrochemistry. Includes lab.  
Prerequisite: CHE 111 General Chemistry I. 
Corequisite: CHE 112L. 
 
CHE 142 General Organic Biochemistry for Nurses (3) (Fall, Online in Spring) 
Includes basics of general chemistry, organic chemistry, and biochemistry. Topics include ions, concentrations, 
reactivity, organic compounds (carbohydrates, starches, proteins, fats, nucleic acids), metabolism, nuclear chemistry, 
and actions of some medications with application to these concepts. Includes lab. "B-" required for nursing majors. 
Corequisite: CHE 142L. 
 
CHE 173 Forensic Science (4) (Limited) 
Meets the needs of criminal justice majors as well as exposing non-science majors with opportunities to see the 
relevance of chemistry, biology, geology, and physics to their chosen professional life. Topics include crime scenes, 
physical evidence, gunshot residue, fingerprints, toxicology, and serology. Provides an overview of techniques used by 
modern criminalistics labs. Includes hands-on opportunity to explore the intricacies of how criminal investigation 
relies on forensic science and how local law enforcement agencies' reliance on scientific studies for technical field 
work. Includes a lab in which the students will perform experiments that draw upon various sciences and a lab 
segment in which crime scenes will be fabricated to practice entry, exit, and collection and interpretation of evidence.  
Corequisite: CHE 173L. 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
CHE 201 Organic Chemistry I (4) (Fall) 
Orbital hybridization, acid-base reactions, electron flow diagrams and functional group reactivity is tied together by 
organic chemistry mechanisms. Laboratory experience develops hands-on technique and supports classroom topics.  
Prerequisite: CHE 111 General Chemistry I. 
Corequisite: CHE 201L. 
 
CHE 202 Organic Chemistry II (4) (Spring) 
A broadened application of mechanisms to new synthetic transformations. Modern spectroscopic techniques of NMR 
and IR are introduced to support the identification of new syntheses being learned. Includes lab that shifts focus from 
technique to application for synthesis of interesting molecular targets. 
Prerequisite: CHE 201 Organic Chemistry I. 
Corequisite: CHE 202L. 
 
CHE 301 Analytical Chemistry (4) (Odd Springs) 
Theory and practice of volumetric, gravimetric, spectrophotometric and electroanalytical methods of analysis. Lecture 
and laboratory incorporate a strong emphasis on spreadsheet applications in generation, collection and statistical 
analysis of data. 
Prerequisite: CHE 202 Organic Chemistry II. 
Corequisite: CHE 301L. 
 
CHE 411 Physical Chemistry I (4) (Odd Falls) 
Chemical kinetics and quantum mechanics. Application of quantum theory to the interpretation and analysis of 
rotational, vibrational and electronic spectra. Rigorous application of computer technology to generate, collect and/or 
analyze data in both lecture and laboratory.  
Prerequisites: CHE 112 General Chemistry II, MAT 202 Calculus II, and PHY 202 General Physics II or PHY 212 Modern 
University Physics II. 
Corequisite: CHE 411L. 
 
CHE 412 Physical Chemistry II (4) (Even Springs) 
A statistical, mechanical approach to the laws of thermodynamics using considerable computer technology to 
generate and analyze data. Includes Lab.  
Prerequisites: CHE 112 General Chemistry II, MAT 202 Calculus II, and PHY 202 General Physic II or PHY 212 Modern 
University Physics II. 
Corequisite: CHE 412L.  
 
CHE 425 Instrumental Analysis (4) (Limited) 
Advanced instrumental methods of chemical analysis and their application to the study of chemical reactions, 
spectral, electrometric and physio-chemical methods. Includes lab.  
Prerequisite: CHE 301 Analytical Chemistry. 
 
CHE 440 Research in Biology and Chemistry (3) (Fall) 
A thorough introduction to aspects of STEM-based research. Focuses on topics in chemical, biological, and 
biochemical research. Set-up, design, control, and optimization of experimental protocols. Data acquisition and 
analysis. Statistical methods. Communication of the results through a variety of media. Cross listed BIO 440. 
Prerequisite: CHE 111 General Chemistry or BIO 111 Introductory Biology I 
 
CHE 472 Biological Chemistry I (5)  
See BIO 472. 
 
CHE 473 Biological Chemistry II (4)  
See BIO 473. 
 
CHE 490 Chemistry Honors (4) (Application Required) 
See Courses for All Disciplines. Thesis is required. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
CMI (Christian Ministry) 
 
CMI 127 Exploring Ministry (2) (Spring) 
Explores the meaning of Christian life as ministry, as well as varied areas of special ministry in modern society.  
 
CMI 222 Introduction to Missions (3) (Limited) 
Explores the biblical basis and history of the expansion of Christianity throughout the world based on the perspectives 
of the World Christian Movement. 
 
CMI 230 Women in Ministry (3) (Limited) 
A study of the biblical, theological, historical, cultural, and practical issues concerning the vital role of women as 
professional ministers and clergy in the Christian church. Deals both with foundational concepts such as ministerial 
call and with practical matters such as the essential place and contribution of women in the professional ministry of 
the contemporary and future church. Prepares both women and men will serve as ministry colleagues.  
 
CMI 310 Communication in Ministry (3) (Even Springs) 
Explores creative methods of communicating biblical and spiritual truth to contemporary culture. The student will 
study current trends in ministry communication, communication to different learning modalities, and effective 
teaching techniques that will help audiences learn and respond to the Christian message. The student will develop a 
variety of abilities in the formulation, communication, and evaluation of the Christian message for contemporary 
audiences and persons. Particular attention will be given to resources for communicating to adolescents.  
 
CMI 316 Church Planting/Growth (3) (Even Springs) 
A study of the theology, theory and practices of church planting and church growth. Includes biblical and 
anthropological principles of both as well as strategies for multiplication and growth of local congregations.  
 
CMI 361 Christian Spirituality and Formation (3) (Even Falls) 
Cultivates an inclusive concept of Christian discipleship, exploring the range of topics form personal piety to social 
responsibility. Surveys the theological foundations and practical implications of the Christian disciplines of prayer, 
Scripture study, fellowship, witness and lifestyle. Emphasis on the developmental process from Christian conversion to 
redemptive involvement in the life of the world. Substitutes for COR 300 for majors in the Department of Theology. 
 
CMI 375/475 Supervised Ministry (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Offers a bridge from the theory of the classroom to the practice of doing ministry. Students are expected to find a 
placement in a local ministry where they serve regularly throughout the semester. Students will also gather biweekly 
to debrief their experience and share concerns and practical challenges of ministry as they work to relate their 
classroom content to their service experience. Supervised Ministry is one credit for each semester of participation. 
Each major in the theology department has a particular requirement for semesters of participation. Repeatable. 
 
CMI 401 Biblical Theology of Mission (3) (Odd Falls) 
A seminar course. Incorporates the study of biblical descriptions of mission and the implications for understanding 
and practice of evangelism and Christian missions and a brief overview of scholarly debate regarding Christian 
missions. Focus on the thematic and textual study of key expressions of the mission of God in the Old and New 
Testaments. Studies Scripture related to God as a missionary God, the Bible as the product of the mission of God, the 
church as a people for the mission of God, and the world as the arena for the mission of God. 
 
CMI 410 Foundations and Practices in Ministry (3) (Odd Springs) 
Integrates theological reflection with the practical matters of leading and serving in ministry using Jesus and Classic 
Tradition as the models for ministry. Explores practical ministry issues such as the call to ministry, ordination, the 
pastoral office, worship leading, preaching, teaching, administration, pastoral care, and compassionate ministries. 
Focuses on the ministerial practices of baptism, Eucharist, wedding and funeral officiant, etc. 
 
CMI 422 Counseling in Ministry (3) (Limited) 
Explores basic skills needed interact with various human needs encountered in ministry. Includes basic counseling 
theories and applied techniques/methods essential in the general Christian counseling. Focuses on needs of the 

 
 

 
 
general population rather than clinical therapy, such as pre-marriage/marriage issues, age-related adjustments, sexual 
issues, interpersonal conflicts, suffering and death, community resources, and professional referrals.  
Prerequisites: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology and junior standing. 
 
COM (Communication) 
 
COM 100 Introduction to Communication (3) (Fall) 
Study and application of basic concepts in communication. Main focus is on learning how to communicate more 
effectively interpersonally and in small groups. 
 
COM 110 Communication Technology (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Introduces basic design principles and content management skills using industry-standard design tools including 
WordPress, Adobe InDesign, and Adobe Photoshop. Introduces basic audio and video-editing techniques using Adobe 
Premiere Pro and Adobe Audition. Application of design and project management skills to a semester-long project. 
Students archive coursework in a portfolio that they will continue to maintain and as a tool for academic reflection 
and professionalism. The course fee covers a one-year subscription to the Adobe Creative Suite. 
 
COM 212 Rhetoric (3) (Fall) 
Theory, research, organization, preparation, and practice of speaking and writing. Explores ethical implications of 
narrative, informative, and persuasive techniques in the context of historical and current principles of rhetoric. 
Required for all majors in the Communication and Media Department.  
Prerequisite: COM 100 Introduction to Communication. 
 
COM 214 Communication Theory (2) (Fall) 
Examines selected theories of communication and message design, to include models, critical analysis, and 
development of a Christian worldview of communication.  
 
COM 232 Readings in Rhetoric (1) (Limited) 
Introduces persuasive events from a critical perspective, providing an analytical framework for examining the impact 
of the persuasive event and the potential power of communication for effective and thoughtful communication.  
 
COM 301 Communication, Spirituality, and Service (3) (Even Falls) 
Explores the intersection between communication and Christianity in relation to redemptive service to others in 
today’s world. Examines connections among communication concepts and biblically-informed spiritual principles and 
practices for affecting personal, local, and global change. Surveys issues of faith and justice in the context of fostering 
the biblical concept of "Shalom" in the world. A service project is required as part of this course. 
 
COM 312 Design Tools: InDesign (1) (Interims) 
Focuses on the development of print layout and compositing skills, manipulating type and images, using Adobe 
InDesign, the industry leading software for page layout construction, and desktop publishing. Must have access to 
Adobe InDesign Software. 
 
COM 313 Design Tools: PhotoShop (1) (Interims) 
Includes an overview of Photoshop interface, features, and editing capabilities of the software Adobe Photoshop. 
Access to Adobe Photoshop is required. 
 
COM 317 Digital Influence (1) (Fall) 
Introduces practical social media skills, digital spaces, best practices, and the use of a variety of social media 
technologies for developing social media influence. Students will engage in a long-term project to identify a platform, 
connect with experts, create and propagate content, establish their own credibility, and build access to a large 
audience to understand and experience the journey of social media influencers. May be repeated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
COM 324 Web Content and Management (3) (Spring) 
Explores web-based innovations in media production and distribution. Students examine content quality and 
management issues with opportunities to create and evaluate web media. Addresses the social and ethical 
implications of search and web-based collaboration and marketing.  
 
COM 330 Genre (1-3) (Limited) 
Style, form, and content of varying communication media. Focuses on a single, limited aspect of the topic being 
considered. 
 
COM 354 Applied Social Media (3) (Spring Online) 
Explores all aspects of social media communication. Students develop a strategic mindset and explore creative and 
scientific approaches for creating, curating, and managing content. Topics explored: analysis, audience, branding, 
ethics, measurement, planning, writing, qualifications and more. Assigned activities lead students to achieve 
Hootsuite Social Media Certification ($300 value) at the end of the course. 
 
COM 368 Intercultural Communication (3) (Spring) 
Theory, skills, and attitudes foundational to effective interpersonal communication with persons of other cultures and 
co-cultures. Focus is on critical analysis of various aspects of intercultural communication, as well as on building 
empathy and coping skills.  
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. 
 
COM 399 Communication Portfolio (1) (Limited) 
Portfolio compilation of projects to demonstrate analysis and application of communication and visual principles.  
Prerequisites: COM 214 Communication Theory, WRT 216 Writing for the Media, and senior standing. 
 
COM 404 Persuasion (3) (Spring) 
Focuses on the theory and practice of persuasive messages. Specific emphasis on learning to influence others 
ethically, effectively, and responsibly through public speaking and digital contexts.  
Prerequisite: SPE 100 Oral Communication or SPE 212 Fundamentals of Speech or COM 212 Rhetoric. 
 
COM 415 Design Thinking (3) (Fall) 
Students will envision, explain, and evaluate innovative and simple solutions to a wide range of human problems. 
Students will explore user-centered research, ideation, prototyping, and testing. Students will work as a member of a 
team with shared goals through specific problems within the framework of realistic constraints. 
Prerequisite: junior standing. 
 
COM 416 Principles and Practices of Freelancing (3) (Odd Springs) 
Explores brand development and starting a successful freelance career using writing, design, artistic, or technical skills. 
 
COM 480 Senior Seminar (1) (Fall) 
Capstone Course. Focuses on career planning and personal growth. Students will prepare and present a professional 
portfolio, prepare for professional interviews, and explore the biblically-informed nature of vocation including 
personal gifting. The course includes a weekend retreat at Camp Michindoh in early October.  
Prerequisite: senior standing. 
 
COR (Community of Learners Core) 
 
COR 100 Life in Community (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Welcomes students to university life; investigates what it means to be members in the SAU community, distinguished 
by a commitment to Christ as the perspective for learning; and explores the study and application of the liberal arts as 
the fullest way of knowing and critical participation in the contemporary world. Waived with 26 or more post-high 
school transfer college credit.  
 
COR 110 Christ and the University Experience (3) (Online) 
Introduces students to the life and philosophy of Spring Arbor University, The Concept, the process of becoming an 

 
 

 
 
educated person with the objectives. Assists student in discovering themselves as persons through development of 
the academic and social skills needed to be successful in their various environments. Course activities emphasize 
general intellectual skills (writing and speaking) and social and relational skills (interpersonal communication). Waived 
with 26 or more post-high school transfer college credit.  
 
COR 200 Christ, Culture, and Diversity (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Explores the virtues of compassion, hope, and justice within the context of local communities. Students engage in 
questions of local import – be it urban, suburban, or rural – and investigate what it means to love in place and with 
responsibility. Includes an experiential weekend. Waived with 58 or more post-high school transfer college credit. 
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. 
 
COR 300 Christian Faith and Community (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Invites students to practice the virtues of memory, gratitude, and faith within the context of the communion of saints, 
as the Apostle’s Creed reminds believers that they are members of a community that spans the Early Church and 
those who will come in the future. Students will explore Christian tradition, practices, and doctrines in terms of 
community living, spiritual formation, and the SAU Statement of Faith. 
 
COR 310 Christian Faith and Scripture (3) (Online) 
Reflects the commitment of Spring Arbor University as a Christian liberal arts university to nurture an appreciation for 
the rich resources of Scripture for creative personal faith and life in the modern world. Designed to foster knowledge 
and understanding of the literature and history of the Bible and the integration of faith, living, and learning.  
 
COR 320 Christian Life and Thought (3) (Online) 
Explores the Christian tradition, its practices, and its doctrines in terms of community living, spiritual formation, and 
the SAU Statement of Faith. Students will also consider their vocation, worldview, and ethical responsibilities from the 
perspective of the SAU Concept. Waived with 58 or more post-high school transfer college credit. 
 
COR 374 Preparing for Cross Cultural Study (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Prepares students to gain an understanding of basic cross-cultural theory, adaptation skills, knowledge of the host 
culture, and basic conversational skills in the language of the host culture. Sections of this course are destination 
specific. Waived with 58 or more post-high school transfer college credit. 
 
COR 375 Cross Cultural Studies (3) (Interim, Summer) 
A distinctive SAU course. Challenges students to practice the virtues of empathy, humility, resilience, justice, and 
compassion through an immersive cross-cultural experience. Invites students to enrich their traditional liberal arts 
courses while gaining first-hand knowledge of a different culture through family, economics, educational systems, 
government, and religion. Students develop cross-cultural analytical skills needed to describe the intimately 
connected world and confront the spiritual truth that "neighbor" includes peoples who may not live geographically 
near them. Waived with 58 or more post-high school transfer college credit. 
Prerequisite: COR 374 Preparing for Cross Cultural Studies. 
 
COR 400 Christian Life and Vocation (2) (Fall, Interim, Spring) 
Asks students to reflect upon their time at SAU and to imagine how the virtues of integrity, service, thankfulness, and 
wisdom woven throughout their education have prepared them for community to come. 
Prerequisites: COR 375 Cross Cultural Studies, COR 300 Christian Faith and Community, senior standing. 
 
COR 410 Christian Perspectives on Cultural Diversity (3) (Online) 
Explores virtues of compassion, hope, and justice within a variety of cultural, social, political, and global contexts. An 
emphasis is placed upon how Christian individuals and communities might think about and engage matters of public 
importance, ranging from immigration and human trafficking to poverty, racism, and war. 
 
COR 474 Preparing for Cross Cultural Studies-Advanced (1) (Application Required) 
Prepares students to gain an understanding of basic cross-cultural theory, adaptation skills, and basic conversational 
skills in the language of and knowledge of the host culture. Sections of this course are destination specific.  
Prerequisite: permission of the Cross Cultural Studies office. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
COR 475 Cross Cultural Studies-Advanced (3) (Application Required) 
Offers a variety of study options in several foreign countries. Students fulfill all of the same course assessments, 
experiences, and activities as 375 with an added research project related to the course objectives or an issue that can 
be explored and researched at a deeper level than would typically be required in COR 375. The research project must 
be approved by the lead instructor. Opportunities for longer term options are available. 
 
CPS (Computer Science) 
 
CPS 105 Introduction to Linux (1) (Fall) 
Linux coding methods and applications.  
 
CPS 150 Introduction to Computers (3) (Limited) 
Introduces computer hardware and software including major components such as CPU, memory, input, output, 
secondary storage, communications, selection of computer equipment, and the social implications of computer 
technology.  Includes lab application of productivity tools, such as word-processing, spreadsheets, presentation, 
database software, as well as the Internet, email, and web page creation. Does not count toward major or minor. 
 
CPS 201 Coding I (4) (Fall) 
Examines approaches to computing solutions for problems in multiple subject areas. Emphasis on efficient algorithm 
design and program structure. Introduces data structures, software engineering, and object-oriented programming in 
Python. Includes lab.  
 
CPS 202 Coding II (4) (Spring) 
Emphasizes object-oriented programming in Java. Additional topics include source code versioning, unit testing, and 
code refactoring. Includes lab.  
 
CPS 203 Web Design and Development (3) (Spring) 
Explores how to deliver interactive webpages through a web browser, develop single page applications, represent the 
data structurally with HTML, design the presentation with CSS, and use open-source design frameworks. Introduces 
basic concepts of UX, networking, Internet Protocols, DNS, URL, and web services. Explores modern web technologies 
including HTML5, CSS3, DOM manipulation, responsive and adaptive design, JavaScript front-end frameworks (e.g., 
VUE and React), design patterns, search engine optimization, typography, etc.  
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 206 Geographic Information Systems (4) (Odd Springs) 
Covers the fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and geospatial data analysis. Focuses on the use of 
geographic information systems in urban/suburban/metropolitan environments. Introduces basic GIS concepts and 
GIS tools. Frames spatial research questions which students implement in a project applied to their area of interest.  
Prerequisite: CPS 201 Coding I or high school computer applications course. 
 
CPS 232 Proof and Discrete Structures (3) 
See MAT 232.  
 
CPS 301 Data Structures and Algorithms (3) (Fall) 
Examines major structures used for data storage and processing, including arrays, lists, stacks, queues, graphs, and 
trees. Algorithms for searching, sorting, and updating structures are developed and analyzed. Individual and group 
hands-on experience with larger software systems through developing and modifying larger programs. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 302 Architecture, Applications, and Languages (4) (Odd Falls) 
Emphasizes the variety of levels from which the disciplines of computing can be viewed: levels of architecture through 
the introduction of finite automata, digital logic, and microprogramming; levels of languages through an examination 
of sequence control, type checking, runtime storage management, and nonprocedural programming paradigms; and 
levels of applications through a general introduction to the areas of database systems and artificial intelligence.  
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 

 
 

 
 
CPS 303 Data Management (3) (Even Falls) 
A study of contemporary models and methodologies for representing, storing, and retrieving large quantities of 
information stored on external devices including virtual storage. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 307 Mobile Application Programming (3) (Fall) 
Study and application of the concepts, principles, tools, and constraints related to developing mobile applications. 
Students will develop and deploy mobile applications, and as a result, gain significant experience using current 
software development tools, asynchronous programming techniques, and common design patterns. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 310 Operating Systems (3) (Even Springs) 
Focuses on the operating system. Includes topics such as process management, device management, and memory 
management. Examines the executive monitor and utilities and their interrelationship. It is advisable for students to 
complete CPS 202 Coding II prior to this course for adequate prerequisite knowledge needed for course success. 
 
CPS 311 Data Communications and Networking (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduces students to several network protocols; industry communications standards; physical and architectural 
elements and information layers of a communication network; diagnostic, design, operational, and performance 
measurement tools; and network security, reliability, and maintenance. Hands-on experience with network 
installation. It is advisable for students to complete CPS 202 Coding II prior to this course to gain prerequisite 
knowledge needed for course success. 
 
CPS 312 Collaborative IT Project (1) (Interim) 
A collaborative, open-ended software development project or experimental laboratory project, solving a real-life 
problem or contributing to the community. Project depends on student and faculty interest. Repeatable up to 3 times.  
 
CPS 313 Computer Systems Security (3) (Odd Springs) 
Introduces fundamental concepts of computer systems security access including the threat environment, corporate 
security policy, cryptography, network security access control, firewall architecture, host hardening, application 
security, data security, and business continuity. Examines security concepts through case studies. It is advisable for 
students to complete CPS 202 Coding II prior to this course to gain prerequisite knowledge needed for course success. 
 
CPS 314 Operating Systems and Cloud Computing (2) (Spring) 
A study of the design considerations of computer operating systems and their interaction with hardware features. 
Introduces public cloud infrastructure to build technology solutions using virtual servers, cloud-based database 
services, software defined infrastructure, cloud-based utility services and serverless computing. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 315 Web Services, API and Data Services (3) (Spring) 
Explores development and management of a complete web application in a modern web server architecture. 
Introduces server side-programming languages to build and use web services. Includes web security, database server, 
web design patterns, social network integration, XML, JSON, Web server administration and virtualization. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 318 Introduction to Data Science (3) (Fall) 
Examines the use of industry tools/technologies and statistical techniques to solve complex data science processes, 
such as statistical inference, data analysis, and visualization. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 320 Topics in Expert Systems (1) (Odd Springs) 
Surveys key concepts of artificial intelligence with a focus on expert systems. Introduces the theoretical basis of expert 
systems including knowledge representation, logic, and inference, and the differences between imperative and 
functional programming languages with hands-on experience with an expert systems tool. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
CPS 331 Software Development Project (3) (Odd Springs) 
Students apply systems analysis concepts as they develop a system based on a real-life problem. Students gain 
experience working with a customer and strengthen their collaboration skills as they work in teams. 
Prerequisite: CPS 429 Systems Analysis and Design I. 
 
CPS 361 Foundations of Linux for Cybersecurity (3) (Online) 
Linux, a web-based server for file and storage management uses open source coding of the kernel, command-line 
utilities, shell environments, system configurations, processes, control of networks, devices, and access control 
features for many online transactions to maintain protection from cybersecurity attacks. 
 
CPS 362 Ethical Hacking Tools and Techniques (3) (Online) 
Introduces hacking techniques and tools including sniffers, DoS, Hijackings, IDS, Firewalls, honeypots validate the 
varied attacks on networks. Cracking encryption, mobile devices, cloud computing, IoT, cryptology, and PKI 
Infrastructure requires cryptanalysis and cryptographic cybersecurity attack countermeasures. 
Prerequisite: CPS 361 Foundations of Linux for Cybersecurity 
 
CPS 363 Security and Management Controls (3) (Online) 
Focus on managing settings and configurations and the application of security and management controls to differing 
operating systems. Addresses effective communication, listening, analysis, and interaction skills with stakeholders. 
 
CPS 364 Cyber Threats, Analysis, and Response (3) (Online) 
Examines penetration multi-processes, social and physical security, reconnaissance scanning and enumeration 
countermeasures with enhanced vulnerability assessments - as related to system hacking measures. Covert hacking 
methods while maintaining access with escalation will expose the means of covering their tracks. 
Prerequisite: CPS 361 Foundations of Linux for Cybersecurity 
 
CPS 366 Network Performance and Security (3) (Online) 
The application of GUI simulations, cybersecurity tools, Cisco Web functions, command line interfaces, and wireless 
standards for securing network architecture. Addresses cloud activity management for effective network control. 
 
CPS 403 Information Assurance and Security (3) (Fall) 
Covers cyber operations and best practices for securing technology infrastructures, protecting digital assets, and 
minimizing related risks. Includes basic security concepts, security policy, access control, authentication and key 
control, cryptography, offensive cyber operations, cyber-related legal precedents and regulations, wired and wireless 
network security, and intrusion detection and prevention systems. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 404 IT Service Management (3) (Spring) 
Reviews best practice models for delivering IT Services to manage risk, strengthen customer service, and establish 
cost-effective services. Includes the review of activities performed by an organization to design, plan, deliver, operate, 
and control information technology services offered to customers. 
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
CPS 410 Algorithms and Formal Language (3) (Odd Falls) 
Studies formal models of computation such as finite state automata, pushdown automata, and Turing machines, along 
with the corresponding elements of formal languages. Uses models to provide a mathematical basis for the study of 
computability. Church’s thesis and the universal Turing machine led to the study of undecidable problems.  
Prerequisites: MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures and junior status. 
 
CPS 429 Systems Analysis and Design I (3) (Fall) 
Introduces systems development methodologies. Emphasis on the systems development life cycle: planning, analysis, 
design, implementation, testing, operation, and support. Application of systems analysis concepts using case studies.  
Prerequisite: CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
 

 
 

 
 
CPS 431 IT Systems Analysis and Design II (3) (Odd Spring) 
Capstone course in which students apply system analysis and design concepts from CPS 429. Students gain system 
development experiences from working with real customers and strengthen collaboration skills as they work in teams. 
Prerequisite: CPS 429 IT Systems Analysis and Design I. 
 
CRJ (Criminal Justice) 
 
CRJ 201 Crime, Corrections, and Criminal Justice (3) (Fall) 
Introduces the criminal justice system including an overview of criminological theory. Examines current theories, 
practices, and careers in criminal justice. Cross listed SOC 201. 
 
CRJ 217 Criminal Justice Exploratory (1) (Fall) 
Exposes students to careers in criminal justice and minimum requirements (fitness, exam scores, etc.) for various 
careers in criminal justice. Should be taken concurrently with CRJ 201 Crime, Corrections, and Criminal Justice. 
 
CRJ 253 Forensic Psychology (3) 
See PSY 253. 
 
CRJ 301 Criminological Theory (3) (Even Falls) 
An overview of biological, sociological, psychological, and cultural theories of crime causation. Includes a brief history 
of criminological theory with special emphasis on social process, structure, and conflict theories. Cross listed SOC 301.  
Prerequisites: CRJ 201 Crime, Corrections, and Criminal Justice, PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology, and SOC 101 
Introduction to Sociology. 
 
CRJ 302 Comparative Criminal Justice Systems (3) (Odd Springs) 
Basic overview of political, administrative, organizational, and cultural differences in various state and national 
criminal justice systems. 
 
CRJ 342 Criminal Law and Court Procedures (3) (Odd Springs) 
Introduces criminal law and procedures, the roles of prosecution and defense attorneys, court procedures and 
decision-making processes, rules of evidence, prosecutorial and judicial discretion, and sentencing guidelines. 
 
CRJ 344 Juvenile Delinquency (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduces causes, incidence, and the history of juvenile delinquency in the United States. Topics include gangs, 
substance abuse, and runaways. Explores criminal justice policies and programs focused on juveniles.  
 
CRJ 447 Criminal Justice Policy (3) (Odd Falls) 
Focuses on criminal justice policies by emphasizing evidence-based policy analysis. Students will apply knowledge 
gained from criminological theory and research design to critically analyze and evaluate criminal justice policies.  
Prerequisite: CRJ 301 Criminological Theory 
 
CRJ 449 Restorative Justice (3) (Even Springs) 
Explores basic principles of restorative justice and specific programs focused on redemptive practices in criminal 
justice including restitution programs, victim-offender reconciliation programs, and alternatives to incarceration. 
Students will actively explore principles of the Christian faith and how they inform criminal justice policies.  
Prerequisite: CRJ 301 Criminological Theory. 
 
ECE (Early Childhood Education) 
 
ECE 265 Social Foundations of Early Childhood Education (3) (Spring) 
Provides comprehensive coverage of the complex socialization process and its effect on the development of children. 
Requires students to research personal socialization histories and evaluate their development in light of major 
concepts presented in class. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab and "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the 
Professional Educator. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development (3) (Fall) 
Focuses on the prenatal stages of human development through age eight. Students will study normal and exceptional 
development of the physical, cognitive, emotional, and social domains of young children in the contexts of home and 
group settings. Field assignments: two hours a week. Individually arranged with instructor. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology, EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab, and "B-" or better in EDU 140 
Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
Corequisite: EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
ECE 320 Assessment, Guidance and Discipline in Early Childhood Education (2) (Spring) 
Focuses on assessing young children’s development and the use of appropriate assessment practices in the ECE 
environment. Examines best practices in assessment and guidance of infants, toddlers, and PK through grade 3 
through research of contemporary theory and methodology. In a systematic observation experience, students 
determine the most appropriate method and develop strategies and practices to guide children’s behavior and direct 
children toward appropriate self-directed behavior as individuals and in group settings. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development, "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the 
Professional Educator and EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab. 
 
ECE 340 Emergent and Beginning Literacy (3) (Spring) 
Explores theories and research in emergent literacy, beginning reading, phonics instruction, and spelling. Compares 
historical perspectives on language acquisition, beginning reading and writing, the interrelationship of reading, 
writing, listening, and various stages of reading, writing, and spelling development using assorted children’s literature, 
poetry, drama, and storytelling. Field experiences include observing, interviewing, assessing language needs, and 
providing targeted strategies for book creation with individual students. "C" or better required. Cross listed RDG 340. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
ECE 360 Assessing Software (1) (Spring Online) 
Students identify and analyze the usefulness of various technologies and how they affect children. Students will 
investigate and interact with technologies to learn how to use children’s software, promote children’s inquiry, and 
connect and integrate a variety of software and technologies into children’s learning. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development. 
 
ECE 361 Motor Development and Motor Learning (2) (Fall) 
Examines the stages of motor development with observation and analysis in laboratory setting. Includes exploration 
of developmentally appropriate instructional activities for skill learning in early childhood. "C" or better required.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology, EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab, and "B-" or better in EDU 140 
Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
 
ECE 365 Curriculum and Methods of Early Childhood Education (4) (Fall) 
For teaching in a preschool or early elementary program. Covers basic curricular areas in preschool and early 
elementary grades. Emphasis on methods and techniques. Requires two clock hours weekly in a site approved by the 
instructor. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development, and EDU 267 Early Adolescent 
Development. 
 
ECE 368 Young Children with Special Needs (3) (Fall) 
Introduces characteristics of young children (birth to eight years) displaying special needs and techniques for 
nurturing their development and interacting with parents. Includes practice in observation and interaction, 
introduction to initial screening procedures and service provisions, planning, and implementation of appropriate 
activities. Off-campus site visits required. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
ECE 378 Assessment and Intervention Strategies in Early Childhood Education (3) (Spring) 
Explores theories and implications of formal assessment in early childhood, procedures for initiating and developing 
formal reporting assessment documents such as IEP, IAP, IFSP, and essential dispositions and skills to develop positive, 

 
 

 
 
respectful relationships with children and caregivers when discussing assessment results. Includes creating and 
practicing strategies to remediate diagnosed special needs at the appropriate age and developmental level, creating 
an appropriate transition plan, and exploring the role of technology in providing services for students. "C" or better. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission and ECE 368 Young Children with Special Needs. 
 
ECE 416 Early Childhood Policy and Standards (2) (Spring) 
Focuses on policies and regulations specific to early childhood care and educational settings. Covers effective 
guidance of young children, from birth through age 8, as individuals and within group settings; government 
regulations for early childhood programs and personnel; and ethical standards for certification of ECE professionals. 
To be taken the semester preceding the professional student teaching semester. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, ECE 265 Social Foundations of Early Childhood Education, ECE 365 Curriculum and 
Methods of Early Childhood Education, senior standing. 
 
ECE 430 Seminar in Teaching Early Childhood (1) (Online) 
Concurrent with student teaching (ECE 450). Covers pertinent topics concerning ECE issues, such as classroom 
management, professionalism, and collaboration with stakeholders. Discussion and feedback on the directed teaching 
experience. Students seeking early elementary endorsement also take EDU 430E (3). "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: satisfactory completion of all required ECE courses, approval to student teach. 
 
ECE 450 Directed Teaching - Early Childhood (5) (Fall, Spring) 
Mentored early childhood teaching experience to complement a successful elementary placement. Provides 
observation and management of the classroom and learning activities of young children. The student assumes 
increasing responsibility for directing the classroom. Graded "S"/"U."  
Prerequisites: SOE admission, satisfactory completion of required EDU courses, approval to student teach. 
 
ECN (Economics) 
 
ECN 101 Introduction to Economics (3) (Odd Springs; Fall and Spring Online) 
Surveys basic principles of economics and the leading schools of thought in the Western world—classical, Austrian, 
and Keynesian contemporary—with implications for modern life and political policy.  
 
ECN 221 Introduction to Microeconomics (3) (Fall) 
Introduces microeconomics and the influences that determine prices, functions of prices in a free market economy, 
distributions of income, and various market structures. 
 
ECN 222 Introduction to Macroeconomics (3) (Spring) 
Introduces macroeconomics and the American economy. Includes organizational and functional aspects of American 
capitalism; the money and banking system; factors that determine aggregate employment, production, and income; 
and fiscal and monetary policies. 
Prerequisite: ECN 221 Introduction to Microeconomics or instructor approval. 
 
ECN 268 Personal Finance (3)  
See FIN 268. 
 
ECN 301 Money and Banking (3) (Even Springs) 
See FIN 301.  
 
ECN 306 Macroeconomic Applications for Managers (3) (Sites, Online) 
Students analysis to analytically synthesize how various macroeconomic course topics effect the student’s place of 
employment or other organization. Topics include growth, inflation, interest rates, monetary and fiscal policies, and 
international economic issues. A case study approach will be used to help students with application. 
 
ECN 322 Globalization: International Economics in the Information Age (3) (Odd Falls) 
Surveys the principles, regimes, and dynamics of the international economy looking at productive factors, trade, 
financial payments, regulatory mechanisms, and international challenges in the information age. Cross listed POL 322. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
EDU (Education) 
 
EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Identifies essential skills and dispositions necessary to become an effective teacher. Includes practical opportunities in 
an educational context to develop the skills of critical thinking, human interaction, organization, reading, writing, and 
speaking. Emphasizes the SOE's expectations and processes. Requires field experience at all certification levels. "B-" or 
better to advance to Professional Skills Lab (PSL) and other EDU courses. Must be taken at SAU.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in ENG 104 College Writing or SAT evidence-based reading and writing score of 480. 
Corequisite: EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab. 
 
EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab (PSL) (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Serves as an interview process where the SOE evaluates teacher candidate skills and dispositions: critical thinking, 
human interaction, reading, writing, and speaking. Successful completion of the PSL precedes and supports 
advancement to other EDU courses and an invitation to apply to the SOE. Students who unsuccessfully complete the 
PSL may be provided the opportunity to develop a professional improvement plan with individual mentoring to 
facilitate skill remediation. Successful completion allows advancement to the teacher preparation program. An 
additional PSL may be required to demonstrate proficiency in an area previously deemed unsatisfactory.  
 
EDU 201 Teaching Elementary Health and Physical Education (2)  
See HPR 201. 
 
EDU 202 Issues and Trends in American Education (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Examines historical and contemporary educational ideas, including how unique legal, religious, cultural, and diversity 
issues have shaped education in the United States. Philosophical foundations of schools as instruments of national 
purpose, values, and social change are studied, and students begin to develop their own philosophy of education. 
Important educators and topics such as school governance, finance, curriculum standards and accountability, and 
professional learning communities are also addressed. "B-" or better is required to advance in the SOE. 
Prerequisites: "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator and EDU 140L. 
 
EDU 230 Educational Psychology (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Explores concepts about how students learn, to understand and apply general principles of instruction, classroom 
management, and assessment to increase student learning. Reviews major developmental and learning theories from the 
framework of educational psychology. Introduces taxonomies of educational objectives along with unit- and lesson-
planning frameworks. Provides skill development and practical application activities to implement instructional 
approaches and strategies for integrating technology into planned lessons. 
Prerequisites: "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator and EDU 140L. 
 
EDU 242 Psychology Applied to Teaching and Learning (2) (Teach out 2022-2023) 
Explores concepts about how students learn, to understand and apply general principles of instruction, classroom 
management, and assessment to increase student learning. Reviews major developmental and learning theories from 
the framework of educational psychology. Introduces taxonomies of educational objectives along with unit- and 
lesson-planning frameworks. Provides skill development and practical application activities to implement instructional 
approaches and strategies for integrating technology into planned lessons. ECE students take ECE 266 Early Child 
Growth and Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development in place of this course. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills and EDU 140L, and "C" in PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
EDU 252 Teaching the Arts in the Elementary Classroom (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Lab course to support ART 152 Art Foundations and MUS 152 Music Foundations to ensure that candidates know that all 
students can obtain the knowledge and skills that make up the arts. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite or Corequisite: ART 152 Art Foundations, MUS 152 Music Foundations. 
 
EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development (1) (Fall) 
Focuses on the development of children ages 9-13 and their physical, cognitive, emotional, and social development, 
and techniques to sustain them in attaining their potential. Required field assignment - two clock hours weekly, 
individually arranged. "C" or better required. 

 
 

 
 
Prerequisite: EDU 140L Professional Skills Lab, "C" or better in PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
Corequisite: ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development. 
 
EDU 271 The Diverse Learner (4) (Interim) 
Focuses on a wide variety of diversities found in today’s schools such as race, ethnicity, culture, religion, family, 
socioeconomic, and gender, as well as physical and intellectual diversities and English Language Learners (ELLs). 
Special emphasis on the teacher’s role in creating an inclusive learning environment, including the use of IEPs. 
Includes off-campus field experience with diverse student populations. Must enroll in EDU 271L.  
Prerequisites: "B-" in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator and EDU 140L, sophomore standing. 
 
EDU 273 Diversity Issues for Educators (2) (Interim) 
Focuses on diversities represented in American schools such as race, ethnicity, culture, religion, family, socioeconomic 
status, gender, ELL/ESL, and others. Focuses on the teacher’s role and responsibility in maximizing learning for all 
students affected by or influenced by any of these factors. Requires at least 10 off-campus approved field experience 
hours in a diverse setting. Taken by special education majors in place of EDU 271. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite:  "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator and EDU 140L. 
 
EDU 319 Methods and Materials for Teaching Music in the Elementary School (2) 
See MUS 319. 
 
EDU 321 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Integrated reading/language arts methods resources course. Prepares teachers to create and implement effective 
literacy learning experiences in the primary grades. Students explore and practice methods and strategies, examine 
materials, participate in active discussions, collaborate with peers, and reflect on classroom observations, culminating 
in the creation of an interdisciplinary, standards-based thematic unit. Focuses on individual, small group, and whole 
group literacy instruction; 20 hours of targeted on-site observations in a literacy lab school. Includes preparation and 
instruction of two lessons in PK-3 classes. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required.  
Prerequisites: "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology and admission to SOE. 
 
EDU 322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in the Intermediate Grades (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Integrated reading/language arts methods resources course. Prepares teachers to create and implement effective 
literacy learning experiences in elementary classrooms in intermediate grades. Students explore and practice methods 
and strategies, examine materials, participate in active discussions, collaborate with peers, and reflect on classroom 
observations culminating in the creation of an interdisciplinary standards-based thematic unit. Focuses on individual, 
small group, and whole group literacy instruction; 20 hours of targeted on-site observations in a literacy lab school. 
Students prepare and teach two lessons in grades 3-6 classes. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required.  
Prerequisites: "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology and admission to SOE. 
 
EDU 336 Teaching at the Secondary Level (2) (Even Springs) 
General topics unique to teaching at the secondary level. Emphasis on lesson planning and design, unit planning and 
design, and classroom management. For students with a major or minor without a methods course or for students 
desiring more learning opportunities in secondary methods. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission and "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
EDU 341 Teaching English at the Secondary Level (3) (Even Falls) 
Topics unique teaching secondary-level English. Emphasizes curriculum developments in English in grammar and 
literature. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology, junior standing. 
 
EDU 342 Foundations of Secondary School Mathematics (3) (Even Springs) 
Topics unique to teaching secondary-level mathematics. Emphasis on recent math curriculum developments including 
reform curricula, technology, and cooperative groups. "B-" or better required. SOE admission required.  
Prerequisites: MAT 201 Calculus I, EDU 202 Issues and Trends in American Education, EDU 230 Educational Psychology. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
EDU 343 Teaching Science at the Secondary Level (2) (Even Falls) 
Topics unique to the teaching of science at the secondary level. Emphasis on recent curriculum developments in 
science and on laboratory supervision. Off-campus site visit required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development.  
 
EDU 344 Teaching History and Social Studies at the Secondary Level (2) (Odd Falls) 
Practical learning course. Emphasizes development and delivery of lesson/unit plans based on the Michigan 
Curriculum Framework and Benchmarks and instructional strategies application, lesson modification, and assessment 
methodologies unique to teaching history and social studies at the secondary level. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development.  
 
EDU 346 Teaching World Languages (2) (Odd Falls) 
Topics unique to the teaching of world languages at the K-12 levels. Practical methods of developing oral and 
comprehension skills will be studied and utilized. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
EDU 349 Methods and Materials for Teaching Music in the Secondary School (3) 
See MUS 349. 
 
EDU 350 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Elementary School (5) (Teach out 2022-2023) 
Integrated reading/language arts methods and resources course. Prepares teachers to create and implement effective 
literacy learning experiences in elementary classrooms. Students explore and practice methods and strategies, 
examine materials, participate in active discussions, collaborate with peers, and reflect on classroom observations 
culminating in the creation of an interdisciplinary standards-based thematic unit. Focuses on individual, small group 
and whole group literacy instruction; 20 hours of targeted on-site observations in a literacy lab school. Students 
prepare and teach two lessons in an elementary classroom. Off-campus campus site-visits required. "B-" or better. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and 
Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
EDU 352 Teaching Social Studies Methods in K-8 Schools (2) (Odd Springs) 
A practical learning laboratory. Examines a variety of techniques, activities, and methods for teaching social studies in 
elementary and middle school grades. Emphasizes understanding and using Michigan Content Standards (GLCEs & C3 
Framework) in developing objective-based lesson plans. A substantial part of this course is accomplished in a site-
based setting in which students apply pedagogical content knowledge and effective practices in supervised settings 
under the direction of certified teachers and the instructor. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, a "B-" or better in SST 200 Human Society: Learning in the Social Studies.  
 
EDU 353 Teaching Science and Math STEM in K-8 Schools (4) (Odd Springs) 
A practical learning laboratory. Examines a variety of techniques, activities, and methods for teaching science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics in elementary and middle schools. Emphasizes understanding and using 
Michigan Science Standards and Common Core State Standards in developing objective-based lesson plans. Includes 
site-based application of pedagogical content knowledge and effective practices in supervised settings under certified 
teachers and the instructor. Off-campus site visits required. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "B-" or better in NSC 200 Elementary Science Survey-Science by Inquiry, and MAT 330 
Foundations of School Mathematics I or MAT 331 Foundations of School Mathematics II. 
 
EDU 360 Integrating Technology in Education (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Focuses on theory and practice of integrating technology into PK-12 teaching; development of a technology portfolio; 
hands-on use of hardware, software, and web tools; effective online teaching/learning with support skills; cognitive 
and motivational basis for effective technology use; benchmarks for PK-12 teaching and learning; and assessment of 
and reflection on technology-based teaching and learning in class and field experience. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
 

 
 

 
 
EDU 366 Multiple Modes of Representation in Elementary Mathematics (4) (Fall, Spring) 
Builds on the content previously learned in MAT330 and MAT331. Explores techniques of representing all 
mathematical content included in the Early Childhood Standards of Quality PK: Early Learning in Mathematics and PK-
6 Michigan Academic Standards: Mathematics. Emphasizes cognitively guided instruction and number talks; the brain 
and mathematics learning; the power of mistakes and struggle in mathematics; rich mathematical tasks; growth 
mindset; and assessment in mathematics for a growth mindset. Candidates develop mathematics lesson plans aligned 
to Michigan math content standards in the area of PK-6 and engage in microteaching opportunities. Candidates teach 
mathematics lessons in PK-6 classrooms. Minimum of 20 clinical hours required. Candidates record core teaching 
practices observed and describe evidence of why the observed strategy fits the CTP. "C" or better required.  
 
EDU 376 Children’s Literature (3) (Spring) 
Prepares prospective elementary teachers with knowledge and enthusiasm for the literature of children and young 
adults. The various genres will be introduced and evaluative considerations for selection of appropriate materials and 
enrichment activities will reinforce the versatility of children’s literature throughout the school curriculum. Does not 
count toward English or language arts major or minor. "C" or better required for teacher education programs. 
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
 
EDU 424 Elementary and Middle School Reading Problems (3) (Fall, Interim) 
Designed to assist the classroom teacher in assessing and diagnosing reading problems in the five areas of reading: 
phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. Various difficulties encountered in the 
reading process will be explored along with techniques for their assessment and support. Off-site case study required. 
Cross listed RDG 424. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "B-" or better in EDU 321 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades or 
EDU 322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Intermediate Grades. 
 
EDU 425 Reading Development in Middle and Secondary Content Areas (3) (Fall) 
Focuses on literacy development strategies emphasizing effective learning in content contexts. Secondary school 
instruction encompasses reading comprehension, critical reading, integrated writing, and study strategies. Students 
examine the role of assessment tools to enhance reading to learn, as well as writing to learn, and methods to promote 
more extensive reading. Interaction with adolescent readers required. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in methods courses. 
 
EDU 429 Effective Classroom Management, Assessment and Instruction (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Designed as a capstone course for preparation as a professional educator. Students revisit what they have learned and 
investigate current research and best practice regarding the essential elements of classroom management, classroom 
assessment, and teaching style/strategies. "B" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in methods courses. 
 
EDU 430E/S Seminar in Teaching (3) (Online) 
Provides support for student teachers during the professional semester. Covers issues of importance to new teachers 
and prepares student teachers for future job interviews through creation of an interview portfolio including evidence 
of the ability to effectively plan and deliver instruction, analyze and interpret student learning data, and develop 
interventions. Includes resume and cover letter preparation and mock job interviews. Elementary student teachers 
seeking an endorsement in early elementary or special education take a respective seminar course. "B-" or better. 
Prerequisites: Completion of all EDU and program courses, 120 hours of pre-student teaching field experience, and 
approved to student teach. 
Corequisites: EDU 450E
 
EDU 433 Applied Core Teaching Practices Across the Curriculum (PK-6) (4) 
A practical learning laboratory. Candidates apply learned math, science, and social studies content using a variety of 
techniques, activities, and methods that directly align to core teaching practices. Emphasizes understanding and using 
Michigan elementary curriculum benchmarks in developing and presenting objective-based lesson plans and 
standards-based units. Requires a minimum 20 hours of teaching and learning in a site-based clinical experience 
supervised by a certified teacher. Core teaching practices are observed and documented with evidence. 
Corequisites: ed
 
 
EDU 450E Directed Teaching: Elementary (Fall, Spring) 
Mentored elementary school teaching. Provides observation and management of the classroom and the learning 
activities of pupils. The student assumes increasing responsibility for directing the classroom. Students seeking early 
childhood endorsement also take ECE 450 Directed Teaching: Early Childhood. Students seeking SED LD endorsement 
also take SED 450 Mentored Experience in Teaching Special Education L.D. The number of credit hours to be taken will 
be determined individually based on specific number of weeks required for placement(s), as articulated in the student 
teacher policy. Graded "S"/"U." 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, satisfactory completion of all required education courses and the required 120 hours of 
pre-student teaching field experience and approved to student teach. 
 
EDU 450M Directed Teaching: Middle School (Fall, Spring) 
Mentored middle school teaching experience to complement a successful elementary placement. Provides 
observation and management of the classroom and learning activities of pupils. The student assumes increasing 
responsibility for directing the classroom. Credit hours are determined individually based on the number of weeks 
required for placement(s), as articulated in the student teacher policy. Graded "S"/"U."  
Prerequisites: SOE admission, completion of all required education courses, 120 hours of pre-student teaching field 
experience, and approved to student teach. 
 
EDU 450S Directed Teaching: Secondary (Fall, Spring) 
Mentored secondary school teaching. Provides observation and management of the classroom and the learning 
activities of pupils. The student assumes increasing responsibility for directing the classroom. Students seeking SED 
endorsement also take SED 450 Mentored Experience in Teaching Special Education L.D. Number of credit hours will 
be determined individually based on specific number of weeks required for placement(s), as articulated in the student 
teacher policy. Graded "S"/"U." 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, satisfactory completion of all required education courses and the required 120 hours of 
pre-student teaching field experience and approved to student teach. 
 
EDU 452 Directed Teaching II (Fall, Spring) 
An additional experience in mentored teaching for those who need further experience in development of classroom 
techniques. Number of credit hours will be determined individually based on specific number of weeks required for 
placement(s), as articulated in the student teacher policy. 
 Prerequisite: EDU 450E/S Directed Teaching Elementary/Secondary and approved to student teach. 
EGR (Engineering) 
 
EGR 100 Introduction to Engineering I (3) (Fall) 
An introduction to engineering as a career, including problem solving, engineering disciplines, design, teamwork, and 
communication. An introduction to engineering graphics is included with an emphasis on solids modeling. 
Corequisite: EGR 100L. 
 
EGR 110 Basics of Engineering Design (1) (Interim) 
An introduction to the engineering design process. 
Prerequisite: EGR 100 Introduction to Engineering I. 
 
EGR 112 Introduction to Engineering II (1) (Spring) 
Introduces the engineering design process, including teamwork development, ethics, professionalism, and reporting. 
Prerequisite: EGR 110 Basics of Engineering Design. 
 
EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab (4) (Fall) 
Principles of linear networks covering the laws of circuit theory that apply to such networks, including elements of 
network topology, mesh currents and node voltages, network theorems, op-amps, energy and power, basic concepts 
of transient response of R-L and R-C networks to a unit pulse driving function, steady state sinusoidal voltage and 
current, including polyphase circuits, mutual coupling, and ideal transformers.  
Prerequisite: MAT 202 Calculus II. 
Corequisite: EGR 203L. 

 
 

 
 
EGR 206 Statics (3) (Fall) 
Fundamental mechanics concepts, equilibrium of force systems, structural applications, cables, friction, virtual work.  
Prerequisite: MAT 202 Calculus II. 
 
EGR 216 Dynamics (3) (Spring) 
Covers kinematics and kinetics of particles and rigid bodies. Principles of impulse, momentum, work, and energy. 
Prerequisite: EGR 206 Statics. 
 
EGR 221 Advanced Circuits (3) (Spring) 
Complex frequency analysis of linear networks, transient RLC network response, mutual coupling and ideal 
transformers, frequency response, Laplace transforms as applied to two-port networks, time and frequency domain 
transformations.  
Prerequisite: EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab. 
Corequisite: MAT 311 Differential Equations. 
 
EGR 222 Digital Electronics (3) (Spring) 
Application of Boolean algebra to the design of logic circuits; Karnaugh maps; registers, counters, and data conversion; 
microlabs for combinational and sequential logic circuits are included. 
Prerequisite: EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab. 
 
EGR 301 Intro to Microcontrollers w/Lab (4) (Fall) 
Application of digital and logic concepts to the study of microcontroller function and use. Topics include assembly 
language programming and hardware interface design for typical applications. Must take EGR 301L. 
Prerequisite: EGR 222 Digital Electronics. 
 
EGR 310 Electronics w/Lab (3) (Fall) 
An introduction to diodes, transistors and op amps and their use in electronic circuits; semiconductor theory; amplifier 
design; power amplifiers; and stability. Lab experiments involving design with transistors and op amps. 
Prerequisite: EGR 221 Advanced Circuits. 
Corequisite: EGR 310L. 
 
EGR 321 Digital Signal Processing w/Lab (4) (Spring) 
Principles of signal processing using sample data including z-transforms, FIR filters, IIR filters, FFT, and 
implementations. Design applications include processing of digital signals and bio-potentials. Three lecture credit 
hours and two to three laboratories during the semester. 
Prerequisite: EGR 222 Digital Electronics. 
 
EGR 326 Mechatronics (3) (Spring) 
Modeling and analyzing electrical and mechanical systems and their interconnectedness; integration of mechanical, 
electronics, control, and computer engineering in the design of mechatronic systems; complete design, building, 
interfacing, and actuation of mechatronics systems to a set of specifications; use of data acquisition software and 
microcontroller programming.  
Prerequisites: EGR 203 Electric Circuits, EGR 206 Statics, and MAT 352 Linear Algebra. 
 
EGR 331 Mechanics of Materials (3) (Spring) 
Covers stress and strain, properties of materials, axially-loaded members, stresses and deformations of beams, 
torsion, combined loading and principal stresses, elastic curves, superposition, design of beams and connections, 
continuous beams, and columns. 
Prerequisite: EGR 206 Statics. 
 
EGR 332 Thermodynamics with Lab (3) (Fall) 
Covers properties of pure substances, heat and work, first and second laws of thermodynamics, entropy, ideal gases, 
gas-vapor mixtures, and availability. 
Prerequisite: EGR 216 Dynamics. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
EGR 401 Senior Design I (4) (Fall) 
Application of design principles to a capstone engineering project. Team-based projects include developing design 
specifications, conceptual designs and final designs, as well as significant oral and written communication 
components. Project examples include intercollegiate competition, industry sponsored, applied research and service 
projects. Students pursuing more than one concentration in engineering or engineering technology must complete a 
two-semester sequence in senior design for each concentration. Includes weekly seminar on professional topics. 
Prerequisites: senior standing, EGR 301 Intro to Microcontrollers w/Lab, EGR 321 Digital Signal Processing w/Lab. 
 
EGR 402 Senior Design II (4) (Spring) 
Completion of final design, fabrication, testing and reporting of the engineering design projects initiated in EGR 401 
Senior Design I.  
Prerequisites: EGR 401 Senior Design I and permission of the instructor. 
 
EGR 411 Introduction to Microprocessors and Microcomputers w/Lab (3) (Even Springs) 
Application of digital and logic concepts to the study of microcontroller and microprocessor function and use, 
assembly language programming, and software design for typical applications. 
Prerequisite: EGR 222 Digital Electronics. 
 
EGR 412 Electromagnetic Fields and Waves w/Lab (3) (Fall) 
Vectors, static electric, and magnetic fields in dielectric and magnetic materials; principles leading to Maxwell's and 
Poisson's equations; and use of the wave equation. 
Prerequisite: EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab; Corequisite: MAT 311 Differential Equations. 
 
EGR 417 Communications Engineering w/Lab (3) (Spring) 
The theory and functions of electronic communication elements including signal analysis, random processes, statistical 
average, transmission lines, and antennas. 
Prerequisites: EGR 221 Advanced Circuits and MAT 351 Statistics. 
 
EGR 418 Fluid Mechanics with Lab (4) (Spring) 
Covers fluid statics and dynamics, flow of an ideal fluid, boundary layer, flow of real fluids through pipes and ducts, 
flow around immersed bodies, and analysis and design of hydraulic systems. 
Prerequisite: EGR 216 Dynamics. 
 
EGR 419 Vibrations (3) (Fall) 
Covers vibration of single degree of freedom systems, natural and forced motions, dynamic loading; multi-degree of 
freedom systems and approximate methods; vibration of elastic bodies. 
Prerequisites: EGR 216 Dynamics and MAT 302 Vector Calculus 
 
EGR 421 Introduction to Biosignal Analysis (3) (Spring) 
Introduction to principles and techniques for biomedical measurements. Includes amplifiers, bioelectric events, clinical 
lab, rehabilitation devices, and safety. Introduction to biological controls and biomaterials. 
Prerequisite: EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab. 
 
EGR 422 Advanced Biosignal Analysis w/Lab (3) (Fall) 
Application of analog, digital, and statistical techniques to the processing of biomedical signals. Includes sources, 
recording, and analysis of ECG, EEG, EMG, and evoked potentials. 
Prerequisite: EGR 203 Electric Circuits w/Lab. 
 
EGR 423 Biomechanics w/Lab (3) (Spring) 
Principles of stress, strain, elasticity, and deformation. Engineering mechanics as applied to bone, muscle function, 
blood flow, and cell deformation analysis. Historical overview of biomechanics, exercise biomechanics, and physiology. 
Neurological motor control relating to human movement. Computer modeling of several human biological systems. 
Prerequisites: PHY 211 Modern University Physics I, BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I. 
 

 
 

 
 
ENG (English) 
 
ENG 103 Basic Writing (3) (Fall) 
Basic skills in writing with emphasis on the writing of clear sentences, paragraphs, and short essays. Does not count 
toward a major or minor in English or language arts. Required for main campus students with SAT Writing Test sub-
score below 27. For Global and online programs, students may waive with a passing writing sample score as 
determine by SAU evaluators. May also transfer in CLEP credit to meet this requirement. "C" or better is required. 
 
ENG 104 College Writing (3) (Fall, Spring, Online, Sites) 
Theory and practice of writing analysis and argument essays with emphasis on library research and writing for 
university courses. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: ACT of 20/SAT Writing Test sub-score of 27 or completion of ENG 103 Basic Writing with a "C" or better. 
Off-campus programs require a passing grade on a writing sample. 
 
ENG 112 World Literature (3) (Fall, Spring, Even Interims, Online) 
Selections from the great literary masterpieces of world literature (classical to Renaissance periods), stressing analysis 
of genre. Cannot be used as a substitution in English or language arts majors or minors.  
Prerequisite: ENG 104 College Writing. 
 
ENG 208 Creative Writing (3) (Spring) 
Introduces students to techniques of writing fiction, poetry, and drama.  
Prerequisite: ENG 104 College Writing. 
 
ENG 220 Introduction to Literary Study (3) (Fall) 
Preparatory course for English literature courses. Introduces basic elements of literature (character, theme, structure, 
etc.) and application of critical functions for interpreting fiction, poetry, and drama.  
Prerequisites: ENG 112 World Literature and sophomore standing. 
 
ENG 304 Writing and Research (3) (Fall, Spring, Sites, Online) 
Focuses on writing as process and writing skills that support research in the disciplines. Several shorter papers will 
contribute to a larger writing project to help students create a portfolio of their best work. "C" or better is required.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in ENG 104 College Writing.  
 
ENG 309 Creative Nonfiction (3) (Odd Springs) 
Study and application of forms, theories and formal techniques behind "the fourth genre." Includes writing the 
different genre styles of history, science, travel, political, memoir and biography. Addresses ethical aspects that exist 
within creative non-fiction through study of the development of the genre and some of its most influential writers.  
Prerequisite: ENG 208 Creative Writing. 
 
ENG 311 Poetry Writing (3) (Odd Falls) 
An in-depth study and application of the craft of contemporary poetry. Students will study the unique forms, 
techniques and styles of contemporary poets, engage in original research of an individual poet or school, and develop 
their own poetry.  
Prerequisite: ENG 208 Creative Writing. 
 
ENG 313 Fiction Writing (3) (Even Interims) 
A study of theme, characterization, plot, conflict, dialogue, complication, scenes of movement, climax and 
denouement of novels and short stories, with writing exercises to cultivate the art and skill of fiction writing.  
Prerequisites: ENG 208 Creative Writing. 
 
ENG 314 Script Writing (3) 
See VID 314. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ENG 315 Shakespeare (3) (Even Falls) 
Selected Shakespearean histories, comedies and tragedies, with special emphasis upon Shakespeare’s themes and 
Elizabethan worldview.  
 
ENG 322 19th Century American Literature (3) (Even Springs) 
Covers the authors immediately following the formation of the U.S. as a nation, especially their voices and visions 
shaping the new nation. Reviews the work of the American Romantics prior to the Civil War; after the war, the course 
focuses on the major writers who represent new voices of the American Realism in America’s emerging landscape.  
 
ENG 329 Early British and Continental Literature (3) (Even Springs) 
A survey of Early British and Continental literature.  
 
ENG 330 Genre (3) (Limited) 
The style, form and content of varying types of literature: drama, film, mythology, fantasy, epic poetry, novel, and 
short story. Examples: English novel, existential literature, and major American novelists.  
 
ENG 333 The Bible as Literature (3) (Spring) 
Examines the Bible as one of the foundational texts for Western literature and why its content and form have so 
deeply influenced literary artists. Explores biblical narrative, poetry and features of key biblical genres. Exposes 
students to the aesthetic unity of the Bible. 
 
ENG 350 Early 20th Century American Literature (3) (Odd Falls) 
A study of the major and secondary authors of American literature from 1865 to 1945, including Ernest Hemingway 
and William Faulkner, with emphasis on the American experience.  
 
ENG 352 American Literature: World War II - Present (3) (Odd Springs) 
American literature since WWII with an emphasis on the changing culture and evolving canon regarding the 
emergence of ethnic writers.  
 
ENG 360 19th Century British Literature (3) (Odd Falls) 
A study of prose, poetry and selected novels of nineteenth-century Britain beginning with the roots of romanticism 
and continuing through the late Victorian period. 
 
ENG 361 English Language (3) (Fall) 
History of the English language from the Anglo-Saxon period to the present. Philosophy of language in general.  
 
ENG 362 20th Century British Literature (3) (Even Springs) 
Includes both a variety of literary forms – poetry, novels, plays, short-stories – as well as voices from the many corners 
of Britain: Irish, English, Scottish, Welsh, and Northern Irish. 
 
ENG 420 Major Authors (3) (Limited) 
In-depth examination of one or more literary figures, such as Chesterton, Dostoevsky, C.S. Lewis, and Wendell Berry.  
 
ENT (Entrepreneurship) 
 
ENT 201 Small Business Management: An Entrepreneurial Approach (3) (Even Falls) 
Highlights how entrepreneurs approach small business opportunities and challenges. Students will be challenged to 
think critically and consider how to apply various business discipline concepts in a real-world context while embracing 
the necessary character attributes of innovation in business practice.  
 
ENT 311 Entrepreneurship and Planning for Success (3) (Odd Springs) 
Introduces the process of turning an idea into a successful startup enterprise. Focuses on the Business Plan as a 
necessary component to beginning a small business and a process by which ideas can become businesses. Addresses 
facets of the business plan from determining actual content, reviewing examples of plans, to creating a 
comprehensive plan.  

 
 

 
 
ENT 401 Social Entrepreneurship (3) (Odd Falls) 
Opportunity to develop entrepreneurial approaches to addressing global challenges. Students engage in the 
application of innovation and risk-taking to solve various social challenges from an entrepreneurial perspective. 
Covers business entrepreneurship skills such as planning, opportunity analysis, initiative, financial management, 
resourcefulness, and creativity as keys to the changing of the systems and patterns of society to provide creative 
solutions within a Christian context. 
 
FAS (Fine Arts) 
 
FAS 152 Fine Arts for Nurses (3) (Spring) 
Explores the relationships between the fine arts (visual arts and music) and the religious, political, and social values of 
a culture. Through systematic, comparative study of two the Renaissance and Contemporary, students develop an 
increased perceptual and aesthetic awareness. Emphasizes assessment and integration of information from a variety 
of sources and perspectives. Meets the general education fine arts requirement (music and art) for nursing students. 
 
FIN (Finance) 
 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Planning (3) (Fall) 
Provides general principles of financial planning, professional ethics, regulation, and planning. Assists in understanding 
the financial planning process and working with clients to set goals and assess risk. Other topics include processing 
and analyzing information, constructing personal financial statements, developing debt management plans, 
recommending financing strategies, understanding basic components of a comprehensive financial plan, the time 
value of money, and economic principles. 
 
FIN 201 Financial Institutions (1) (Spring) 
A trip that explores the financial districts of a major city such as New York, Chicago or London. The length of the trip 
may vary. This trip could be an extra week added onto the cross-cultural experience. Graded "S"/"U," unless required 
for the major/minor.  
 
FIN 202 Student Managed Investments (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Participation in the Gainey School of Business Investment team that invests funds for student scholarships and trips. 
Graded "S"/"U," unless required for the major or minor. May be repeated once.  
 
FIN 268 Personal Finance (3) (Online) 
Various alternatives available in planning financial affairs; budgeting, buying on credit, borrowing, saving, investing 
intelligently, home ownership and wise estate planning comprise the core of this course. Practical applications 
facilitate understanding of essential principles of finance and incorporate recent developments. Cross listed ECN 268. 
 
FIN 301 Money and Banking (3) (Even Springs) 
The development of our monetary and banking structure, with emphasis on the role of government and the Federal 
Reserve System in today’s economy. It is strongly recommended that students take ECN 222 Introduction to 
Macroeconomics before taking this course to acquire prerequisite knowledge needed for course success. Cross listed 
BUS 301 and ECN 301.  
 
FIN 362 Principles of Finance (3) (Fall) 
The principles and problems involved in the finance function of firms, including financial aspects of the form of the 
organization and the allocation of capital.  
Prerequisite: ACC 221 Principles of Accounting I. 
 
FIN 367 International Finance (3) (Limited Offering) 
Focus on foreign exchange markets, forecasting exchange rates, currency risk hedging techniques, and current 
derivative instruments. In addition, macroeconomic policies, international portfolio management, and investment 
practices of multinational firms will be reviewed to expose students to current issues. 
Prerequisite: FIN 362 Principles of Finance. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
FIN 368 Insurance and Risk Management (3) (Even Springs) 
Provides an overview of risk management and insurance concepts. Primary focus on identification and evaluation of 
loss exposures in personal and business settings. Alternative techniques for managing these risks will be analyzed. 
Decision-making methods under uncertainty are covered in this course. It is strongly recommended that students take 
a Statistics course before taking this course to acquire prerequisite knowledge needed for course success.  
 
FIN 418 Investments (3) (Odd Springs) 
The theory and practice of investments, emphasizing securities, the manner and method of their exchange, the 
function of security market and the factors promoting changes in security prices.  
Prerequisites: ECN 222 Introduction to Macroeconomics and ACC 221 Principles of Accounting I.  
 
FIN 420 Retirement Planning (3) (Even Falls) 
Covers retirement planning for the business, business owner and individual; qualified plans, nonqualified plans and 
IRAs; the practical knowledge needed for choosing the best retirement plan; and designing a plan that will meet 
clients' needs based on their tax situation and other considerations. 
Prerequisite: FIN 362 Principles of Finance. 
 
FIN 425 Estate Planning (3) (Odd Falls) 
Includes aspects of estate and gift tax planning, transfer, administration, and taxation of property; basic 
understanding of the unified estate and gift tax system; transfers of property outright or with trusts, wills and powers 
of appointment; federal estate and gift taxation; the marital deduction; various estate planning devices used in the 
estate planning process; the interview process; ethical standards; and development of appropriate estate plans. 
Prerequisite: FIN 362 Principles of Finance. 
 
FIN 450 Internship (6) (Fall, Spring) 
Substantive business experience in finance. A student is matched with a corporate partner or business of choice. 
Involves the student in a substantial financial role. The advisor will visit the work site to assess the student in the 
workplace and make suggestions that could enhance the internship experience. 
 
FIN 451 Business Forecasting and Analytics (3) (Odd Springs) 
Introduces state-of-the-art techniques in business forecasting. Emphasizes both principles and applications. Students 
develop forecasting models in Excel and/or other software programs. Small and large cases are utilized to enhance 
learning.  
Prerequisite: BUS/HES/MAT/PSY 351 Statistics. 
 
FIN 452 Series 7 Preparation (3) (Limited) 
Comprehensive course focusing on Series 7 preparation. An in-depth examination of the securities industry from the 
perspective of the brokerage function, including the regulatory environment and legal liability issues, professional 
ethics, transaction settlement procedures, public/client relations and investment planning strategies. Prepares 
students to complete the Qualification Examination for General Securities Registered Representative (Series 7 Exam).  
Prerequisite: FIN 362 Principles of Finance. 
 
FIN 480 Finance Capstone (3) (Odd Springs) 
An advanced comprehensive course in corporate finance with focus on financial management. Covers theory and 
practice of the management of the finance function in corporations. Topics covered include capital budgeting, the 
theory and practice of capital structure, leasing, capital asset pricing model, long-term financing, expansion and 
synthetic securities. Also includes a study of the wide range of markets and instruments used to finance projects and 
control risk in today’s global economy. Introduces the operational, regulatory, and transitory characteristics of capital 
markets and financial institutions. Topics include the monetary system, stock, bond, mortgage, futures, options 
markets, pension funds, investment firms, commercial banks, credit unions, mutual funds and insurance companies.  
Prerequisite: FIN 362 Principles of Finance. 
 
 

 
 

 
 
FRE (French) FRE courses are suspended until further notice.  
 
FRE 101 Elementary French I (3)  
Overview of the elements of French grammar, vocabulary acquisition, pronunciation patterns and practice in 
conversation, and introduces French cultures. Does not count toward the French minor requirements. 
 
FRE 102 Elementary French II (3)  
Continuation of FRE 101. Does not count toward the French minor requirements.  
Prerequisite: FRE 101 Elementary French I. 
 
FRE 201 Intermediate French I (3)  
Acquisition of extensive vocabulary, development of conversational and communicative skills, survey of essential 
grammatical structures, exploration of cultural values in Francophone regions. Does not count toward French minor. 
Prerequisite: FRE 102 Elementary French II. 
 
FRE 202 Intermediate French II (3) 
Continuation of FRE 201. Does not count toward the French minor requirements. 
Prerequisite: FRE 201 Intermediate French I. 
 
FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture (3)  
Gateway to study in all other French 300- and 400-level courses. Prepares students for continued advanced 
coursework in French. Topics include developing advanced grammatical forms, presentation skills, and the ability to 
critique within the cultural and literacy contexts. "B-" or better is required for other upper-level French courses. 
 
FRE 321 Advanced French Composition (3)  
Exercises, compositions, drills, and communicative activities designed to develop advanced competence in French.  
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
FRE 322 Advanced French Conversation and Phonetics (3) 
Intensive practice in speaking French with oral presentations, discussions, and listening assignments. Includes a 
detailed study of French phonetics, with emphasis on perfection of the students’ spoken accent.  
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
FRE 323 Contemporary French Culture (3)  
Readings and listening assignments dealing with issues in contemporary French life and society. Acquaints students 
with modern France and the lifestyles of its people, as well as politics, current events, commerce, and the arts. May 
include various Francophone regions of the world. Recommended prerequisite of FRE 322 Advanced French 
Conversation and Phonetics. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
FRE 324 French Civilization (3)  
Covers French history and geography with emphasis on the major political, social, and artistic movements. Designed 
to enhance the students’ knowledge of French culture in its historical context and to enrich their literary studies.  
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
FRE 325 Survey of French Literature (3)  
Selected literary works in prose and poetry from the Middle Ages to the 20th century with emphasis on the use of 
language in a critical approach to literature. Recommended prerequisite of FRE 322. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture 
 
FRE 326 Survey of French Literature (3)  
Selected literary works in prose and poetry dating from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century, with emphasis on 
the use of language in a critical approach to literature. It is recommended that students take FRE 322 Advanced 
French Conversation and Phonetics before taking this course. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
FRE 410 Seminar in French Literature (3)  
A capstone study of selected landmark works in prose and poetry incorporating literary analysis and criticism as well 
as a comprehensive review of the four skills: reading, writing, listening and speaking. Recommended prerequisite of 
FRE 322 Advanced French Conversation and Phonetics. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in FRE 306 Introduction to French Literature and Culture. 
 
GEO (Geography) 
 
GEO 221 Introduction to Geography (3) (Fall Online) 
The physical and cultural elements of mankind’s habitats; the importance of maps and their use; and the significance 
of all elements of the earth to man. 
 
GEO 232 North America (3) (Even Springs Online) 
Studies the North American continent within the context provided by physical, cultural, and historical geography. 
 
GEO 304 Geography and History of Russia and the Former Soviet Union (3) 
See HIS 304. 
 
GEO 331 China, India, and Japan (3) 
See HIS 331. 
 
GEO 332 Africa (3) 
See HIS 332. 
 
GEO 333 Latin America (3) 
See HIS 333. 
 
GEO 334 The Middle East (3) 
See HIS 334. Cross listed POL 334. 
 
GEO 335 East Asia (3) 
See HIS 335.  
 
GEO 342 Hebrew History and Geography (3) 
See BIB 342.  
 
GER (German) 
 
GER 100 Business German (3) (Limited) 
Prepares students to communicate in German in everyday situations with emphasis on business. Practice speaking, 
listening, writing, and reading business themes and topics of cultural differences in etiquette and practices. 
 
GER 101 Elementary German I (3) (Limited) 
Fundamentals of speaking, reading, writing, and listening to German and interactive, practical communication skills. 
German culture will be explored.  
 
GER 102 Elementary German II (3) (Limited) 
Continuation of GER 101.  
Prerequisite: GER 101 Elementary German I. 
 
GER 201 Intermediate German I (3) (Limited) 
Review and thorough study of grammar and communication skills. Extensive practice in conversation, reading, and 
composition in a cross-cultural context. Designed to promote awareness/appreciation of German culture.  
Prerequisite: GER 102 Elementary German II. 
 

 
 

 
 
GER 306 Introduction to German Literature and Culture (3) (Limited) 
Central concepts include developing advanced reading and critical writing skills, higher level grammatical forms, 
presentation skills, and the ability to critique within the cultural and literary contexts. 
Prerequisite: GER 201 Intermediate German I. 
 
GES (General Studies) 
 
GES 100 Writing Experience (1-2) (Limited) 
Designed for students who want more opportunity to develop their writing skills. A process-oriented class in which 
writing and rewriting of all papers is expected. Includes development of ideas, different levels of support, and patterns 
of writing. Individual needs will be addressed. One additional lab hour a week is required.  
Prerequisite: by permission from the Academic Support Center only. 
 
GES 110 Study Enhancement (1) (Fall, Spring) 
A course for entering students needing modeling and practice using successful study skill enhancement. Primary 
topics are time management, learning styles, goal setting, strategies for test taking, note taking, and reading. GES 112 
Application: Study Strategies required as follow-up course. 
 
GES 112 Application: Study Strategies (1) (Spring) 
Emphasizes application of learning strategies presented in GES 110 and GES 116. Selected content courses being taken 
concurrently by the students will be monitored weekly through tutorial sessions.  
Prerequisites: GES 110 Study Enhancement, GES 116 Reading and Study Assistance Program, or Academic Support 
Center permission. 
 
GES 115 College Reading I (2) (Spring) 
A reading course to assist new or returning students on strategies for dealing with university textbooks. Includes 
locating main ideas, drawing inferences, summarizing, and vocabulary development. Entrance test required.  
 
GES 116 Reading and Study Assistance Program (3) (Fall) 
Prepares a student to successfully handle college-level reading and study tasks. Goal-setting and time management 
are included early in the semester. Focuses on interactive strategies for handling reading, vocabulary development, 
note-taking, and test-taking in targeted General Education courses. GES 112 Application: Study Strategies required as 
a follow-up course. 
 
GES 130 ESL Intermediate Topics (3) (Limited) 
Offers a variety of intermediate topics allowing the students to focus on a particular area. Topics may vary by 
semester. 
 
GES 131 ESL Intermediate Foundations I (2-4) (Limited) 
Integrated skills English course, focusing on reading, writing, listening/speaking, grammar, reading strategies, 
presentation skills, summary writing, introduction to essay writing, and comprehension and analyzation of a variety of 
authentic texts. 
 
GES 132 ESL Intermediate Grammar (2-3) (Limited) 
Focuses on understanding and using complex grammatical structures. Introduces a detailed editing procedure for 
written work with practical application. 
 
GES 133 ESL Intermediate Reading (2-4) (Limited) 
Reading strategies to understand the organization of a text and its content. Focuses on increasing reading speed. 
 
GES 134 ESL Intermediate Writing Workshop (1-4) (Limited) 
Focuses on the organization of writing at the sentence and paragraph level. Students learn to write topic sentences 
and develop each topic within a paragraph through clear explanations and examples. Emphasizes effective use of 
transition words. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
GES 135 ESL Intermediate Listening and Speaking (1-4) (Limited) 
Focuses on developing each student’s ability to communicate fluently and accurately by integrating listening, speaking 
and pronunciation practice. Specific listening and speaking strategies that focus on the American culture as well as the 
expectations and requirements of the American classroom will be studied and practiced. 
 
GES 136 ESL Intermediate Projects (3) (Limited) 
Students complete projects such as surveys, newsletters, and a group presentation, and participate in culture field 
trips with opportunities to interact and communicate with Americans in the Spring Arbor/Jackson community. 
 
GES 137 ESL Current Issues in American Culture (3) (Limited) 
Provides the opportunity to learn modern, idiomatic English, especially as used in U.S. journalism, to fully understand 
current events and issues in American culture. Focuses on the five major social institutions as expressed in American 
culture. Exposes students to the cultural elements by which those institutions are articulated such as art, movies, 
sports, and leisure activities. 
 
GES 140 ESL Advanced Topics (1-3) (Limited) 
Offers a variety of advanced topics allowing students to focus on a particular area. Topics vary by semester. 
 
GES 141 ESL Advanced Foundations II (3) (Limited) 
Integrated skills English course, focusing on reading, writing, listening/speaking, grammar, expository writing, critical 
analysis, focused listening, note taking, and the analyzation of academic texts. 
 
GES 142 ESL Writer’s Workshop (1-4) (Limited) 
Focuses on the organization and development of Western-style academic writing. Students practice writing 
referenced research papers, as well as personal essays. Grammatical structures will be analyzed and practiced. 
 
GES 146 ESL Current Issues in the Global Village (3) (Limited) 
Provides the opportunity to learn modern, idiomatic English as used in U.S. journalism to understand global current 
events and issues more fully from a North American perspective. Students research and articulate their own 
government’s position on specific issues and present those findings through written and spoken methods. 
 
GRE (Greek) 
 
GRE 331 Elementary New Testament Greek I (3) (Even Falls) 
The elements of New Testament Greek including vocabulary, conjugations, declensions, significance of tenses, cases, 
moods, translations, written compositions, and selected readings in the New Testament. 
 
GRE 332 Elementary New Testament Greek II (3) (Odd Springs) 
Continuation of GRE 331 Elementary New Testament Greek I. 
Prerequisite: GRE 331 Elementary New Testament Greek I. 
 
GRE 431 Intermediate Greek I (3) (Odd Falls) 
Advanced work in grammar, syntax, and translation of selected passages in the New Testament. 
Prerequisite: GRE 332 Elementary New Testament Greek II. 
 
GRE 432 Intermediate Greek II (3) (Even Springs) 
Continuation of GRE 431 Intermediate Greek I. 
Prerequisite: GRE 431 Intermediate Greek I. 
 
HEB (Hebrew) 
 
HEB 331 Elementary Biblical Hebrew I (3) (Odd Falls) 
An introduction to the study of biblical Hebrew including grammatical structure, vocabulary acquisition, and its 
application to the Hebrew Scriptures. Introduces appropriate study tools to facilitate reading and exegesis.  
 

 
 

 
 
HEB 332 Elementary Biblical Hebrew II (3) (Even Springs) 
Continuation of HEB 331 Elementary Biblical Hebrew I. Includes translation from the Massoretic Text using simpler 
narrative passages.  
Prerequisite: HEB 331 Elementary Biblical Hebrew I. 
 
HEB 431 Intermediate Biblical Hebrew (3) (Limited) 
Advanced work in grammar, syntax, and translation of selected passages in the Massoretic Text. 
Prerequisite: HEB 332 Elementary Biblical Hebrew II. 
 
HES (Health and Exercise Science) 
 
HES 321 Scientific Principles of Strength and Conditioning (3) (Fall) 
Examines the human body and its responses to exercise including program design for aerobic, resistance training, 
speed and agility, and plyometric training. Also includes exercise testing and nutrition, and facility design, 
organization, and policies. Prepares students for the NSCA CSCS exam. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: HPR 178 Aerobic Activities and HPR 179 Strength and Power Training 
 
HES 335 Facilities Planning and Operations for Health, Fitness, Recreation and Sports (3)  
See REC 335.  
 
HES 345 Principles of Exercise Prescription (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Presents the essential components of systematic, individualized exercise prescriptions for healthy and special 
populations. Addresses appropriate pre-exercise screening, health-risk stratification, and principles of prescription 
including modes, intensity, duration, frequency, and progression of exercise following American College of Sports 
Medicine guidelines. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisite: "C" or better in HPR 153 Foundations of Physical Fitness, Health and Wellness. 
 
HES 351 Statistics (3) (Fall) 
Introduces statistics with an interdisciplinary perspective using examples, problems, and applications from health 
sciences. Covers descriptive and inferential statistics. Emphasis on problem-solving through collection, organization, 
analysis, and interpretation of data. Lab activities and computer applications. "C" or better for departmental majors. 
 
HES 365 Introduction to Pharmacology (3) 
See BIO 365.  
 
HES 381 Nutrition and Energy Metabolism (3) (Spring) 
A study of nutrients and their role in health and fitness with an emphasis on nutrition knowledge and 
application for optimal performance. Particular attention is given to body composition, energy balance, and fuel for 
aerobic/anaerobic metabolism. A computerized diet analysis and meal preparation are required. "C" or better 
required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: declared HPR major, minor, or institutional endorsement, sophomore standing. 
 
HES 382 Functional Anatomy and Application (3) (Fall, Spring) 
An in-depth study on the functional aspects of anatomy including muscle origin and insertions, joints, joint movement, 
gait, and muscle function. Introduces the prevention, evaluation, and treatment of athletic-related injuries, and other 
related concepts/theories. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II, and sophomore standing. BIO 265 may be taken concurrently with 
proper authorization. 
 
HES 442 Advanced Athletic Training (3) (Limited) 
A thorough review of the structure and function of bones, muscles, and specific anatomic components of major joints. 
Covers the array of athletic injuries and common causes, examination, and recommended treatment. Examines 
treatments and programs to rehabilitate/prevent specific injuries. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: HES 382 Functional Anatomy and Application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
HES 450 Internship (6-12) (Fall) 
"C" or better required for departmental majors. 
 
HES 462 Cardiovascular Function and Electrophysiology (3) (Fall) 
An in-depth study of circulation, heart structure and function, cardiovascular training responses, and heart disease. 
Includes instruction in EKG interpretation and experience and EKG metabolic cart graded exercise testing. Addresses 
cardiovascular medications and diagnostic procedures. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: HPR 153 Foundations of Physical Fitness, Health, and Wellness; BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II; and 
junior standing. BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II may be taken concurrently with proper authorization. 
 
HES 473 Biomechanical and Anatomical Analysis of Human Movement (4) (Fall) 
Analysis of human movement related to locomotion, basic skills, and athletic performance. Utilizes biomechanical and 
anatomic approaches. Includes lab. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: BIO 265 Anatomy and Physiology II (may be taken concurrently with approval), senior standing.  
Corequisite: HES 473L. 
 
HES 474 Physiology of Exercise (3) (Spring) 
Designed to assist the future practitioner – teacher, coach, athlete, trainer, fitness instructor, physical therapist, or 
team physician – in the understanding of physiologic principles underlying the physical conditioning process and the 
body’s acute and chronic adaptation to exercise. Examines the application of basic physiologic principles such as 
muscular and neurological control of movement, metabolism and basic energy systems, hormonal regulation of 
exercise, and cardiorespiratory function and performance for improved human fitness and performance. "C" or better 
required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I, and junior standing.  
 
HES 475 Physiology of Exercise Lab (2) (Spring) 
Includes field and laboratory testing for various components of physical fitness. Special emphasis given to graded 
exercise testing and metabolic calculations. Strongly encouraged for students also taking HES 474 Physiology of 
Exercise. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisites: BIO 264 Anatomy and Physiology I, and junior standing.  
 
HES 480 Senior Seminar (1) (Fall) 
A seminar course intended as a capstone with emphasis on career and professional development skills and activities 
as preparation for graduate programs or employment in health, human performance, and recreation related fields. 
Cross listed REC 480. "C" or better required for departmental majors. 
Prerequisite: senior standing. 
 
HIS (History) 
 
HIS 121 History of Civilization I (3) (Fall) 
Study of the rise and development of civilization throughout the world. Emphasizes the origins of Western civilization 
in the river valleys of Egypt and Mesopotamia, its development in Greece and Rome, and its flowering during the 
Middle Ages. Attention given to the civilizations of South and East Asia, Africa, and the Americas and their 
contributions to world civilization. Concludes with the voyages of European discovery, which brought the isolated 
civilizations of the world into direct contact with each other. Explores Christian interpretations of world history. 
 
HIS 122 History of Civilization II (3) (Spring) 
A continuation of HIS 121, from the rise of the Renaissance in Europe to the present day. Major themes explored include 
the Scientific Revolution, Enlightenment, revolutionary era, industrialization and colonialism, the two world wars and 
the Cold War. Emphasizes the response of people of Africa, Asia, and Latin America to the encroachments of the West. 
Covers the rise of an uneasy global civilization in the 21st Century. Explores Christian interpretations of modern history. 
 
HIS 141 United States to 1877 (3) (Fall, Sites, Online) 
Study of American history from colonial times through the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasizes fundamental 
forces or cultural ideals that have shaped this period of history, such as Puritanism, the Enlightenment, the 

 
 

 
 
Revolution, antebellum Evangelicalism, and the struggle over slavery. A multidisciplinary approach will be taken, as 
well as efforts to develop Christian insights concerning the unfolding of American history. 
 
HIS 142 United States Since 1877 (3) (Spring, Sites, Online) 
Introduces cultural ideals and forces that have helped shape modern America, such as industrialization, progressivism, 
the battle between science and religion, the two world wars, the Great Depression, the New Deal and Great Society, 
the spirits unleashed in the 1960s, and the culture wars of the 1990s. A multidisciplinary framework is used, as well as 
efforts to develop Christian insights so that students will be better able to make sense out of modern life. 
 
HIS 221 Black Experience in America (3) (Even Falls) 
Focuses on the experience of being black in America, analyzed from historical, sociological, and artistic perspectives. 
 
HIS 230 Contemporary World Affairs (3) (Even Falls) 
See POL 230. 
 
HIS 236 Christianity and Politics (3) 
See POL 236. 
 
HIS 302 Nineteenth Century Europe (3) (Odd Falls) 
Examination of political, social, and ideological developments in Europe during the "long peace" from 1815 to 1914. 
Emphasizes the growth, development, and changes in ideologies of conservatism, liberalism, socialism, and 
nationalism. Students develop discernment in the study of primary sources and variety of historical interpretations.  
 
HIS 303 Twentieth Century Europe (3) (Even Springs) 
Covers events and developments in Europe from the outbreak World War I to the present. Explores the challenge to 
democratic thought and institutions posed by communism and fascism, as well as the collapse of the communist 
system since 1989. Examines the decline of Europe as the center of world power and the development of a post-
imperial culture. Students are encouraged to develop discernment in the study of primary sources.  
 
HIS 304 Geography and History of Russia and the Former Soviet Union (3) (Even Falls) 
Covers the physical and political geography of Russia and the independent states of the former Soviet Union, a region 
of enormous influence on the world stage. Emphasizes the historical development of the Russian state, the creation of 
communist ideology, the Soviet Union, and collapse of both ideology and the Union. Cross listed GEO 304.  
 
HIS 306 The Makings of Modern Europe (4) (Even Falls) 
Seminar course. Covers the major stations and creation of modern Europe from the end of the Roman Empire through 
the Enlightenment. Emphasizes the major institutions shaping modern European society: Christendom, the idea of 
Rome, the creation of nobility and social classes, the development of Western thought, and the exploration and 
expansion of European influence on the outside world. 
 
HIS 307 Colonial America, 1492-1760 (3) (Limited) 
Examination of the American colonies from their founding by European powers to the expulsion of the French by the 
British at the conclusion of the French and Indian War. Concentration on the clash of various cultural ideals—both 
Native American and European—as well as the religious bases of many movements and colonies. Students compare 
and contrast various movements in light of their own maturing perspectives and to show connections between the 
colonial past and present conditions. 
 
HIS 308 The American Revolution (3) (Limited) 
Examines this crucial period in the formation of a new nation and the clash of cultural ideals between British and 
colonial leaders. Explores both sides and reflects upon the fate of communities such as native Americans, loyalists, 
and other minorities. Evaluates strengths and weaknesses of revolutionary ideals in light of subsequent history.  
 
HIS 309 Civil War and Reconstruction (3) (Odd Falls) 
Examines the forces leading up to the Civil War, the major battles, and the difficulties of reuniting a country torn apart 
by major conflict. Special emphasis placed on causative factors such as slavery, comparing and contrasting the 
 
 
 
 

  

 
strengths and weaknesses of both sides, as well as the various reconstruction plans and realities. Students will be 
encouraged to see all sides of this conflict, as well as reflecting on the impact the war has had on subsequent history.  
 
HIS 310 Twentieth Century America (3) (Even Springs) 
Examines the dominant cultural ideals that shaped American history in the 20th Century. Emphasis placed on the clash 
of secular and religious themes in the making of America – a struggle continuing to the present. Students compare 
and contrast these movements and themes to formulate perspectives on directions to take in the 21st century. 
 
HIS 313 America in the 1960s (3) (Even Interims) 
In-depth examination of the tumultuous 1960s that brought many changes into American culture—political, social, 
economic, cultural, and religious. Introduces insights from various Christian communities regarding this decade. Cross 
listed POL 313.  
 
HIS 331 China, India, Japan (3) (Online) 
Asia’s lands and peoples, with special emphasis on China, India, and Japan. Includes historical, political, cultural, and 
economic insights within a geographical context. Cross listed GEO 331.  
 
HIS 332 Africa (3) (Online) 
The African continent: the natural environment, the people and their customs, the discovery and opening of the 
country by explorers and missionaries, the partition of Africa, and the present political and economic trends. Cross 
listed GEO 332.  
 
HIS 333 Latin America (3) (Limited) 
Latin America from the beginning of the colonial period to the present. Introduces the history and culture in a 
geographical setting and Latin American relations with the rest of the world. Cross listed GEO 333. 
 
HIS 334 The Middle East (3) (Odd Springs) 
An interdisciplinary survey of the lands, history, and political dynamics of Southwest Asia, commonly known as the 
Middle East, and North Africa. Includes elements of the topography and cultural landscape, a survey of the history 
since 7th Century Muslim conquest, and discussions of current political issues. Cross listed GEO 334 and POL 334. 
 
HIS 335 East Asia (3) (Even Springs) 
Examines the three largest cultures in East Asia, China, India, and Korea. Includes a survey of the interplay between 
these three cultures over the past millennia. Special emphasis is on the 20th and 21st century and the connections 
between the military, communist, and capitalist ideologies that led to the most destructive era in the history of the 
region and the dramatic restoration of Asian economic power in the world. Cross listed GEO 335 and POL 335. 
 
HIS 340 Women in American History (3) (Limited) 
Designed to disclose the significant achievements of women in major fields of endeavor, and surveys voluminous 
literature that is available. The long struggle of American women to cast off the image of "the weaker sex" in an effort 
to have their roles recognized is a study that promises to contribute significantly to contemporary reform decisions. 
 
HIS 342 Hebrew History and Geography (3) 
See BIB 342. 
 
HIS 343 History of Christianity (3) 
See REL 343. 
 
HIS 346 History of Christianity in America (3) 
See REL 346.  
 
HIS 361 Michigan History (3) (Spring Online) 
Examines Michigan history within its geographic context at the heart of the Great Lakes region, the settlement of the 
state, the variety of peoples that make up the area, and the political, social, and cultural institutions of the state. 
Emphasizes Michigan’s role in the economy of North America, and history of the state’s use of resources.  

 
 

 
 
HIS 368 Diplomatic History (3) (Odd Falls) 
A chronological and conceptual journey through the maze of relations between the U.S. and other states during the 
past 230 years. Assumes students understand the broad outlines of U.S. history and have interest in U.S. relations 
with other nation states. Explores the changing dynamics of extra-territorial relations as the U.S. expands across the 
continent and extends its influence around the world. Focuses on the interaction of non-state actors with national 
policy and the foreign policy challenges of the 21st century. Cross listed POL 368. 
 
HIS 382 International Human Rights (3)  
See SOC 382.  
 
HIS 403 History of Biblical Interpretation and Criticism: 1750-1950 (3) (Odd Springs) 
A study of the intellectual currents of the modern era and how those were reinterpreted through study of the Old and 
New Testaments. Examines the initial challenges to traditional scripture by Reimarus and Michaelis through the 
Second Quest of Bultmann, Kaesemann and others. Focuses on the cultural developments of the Enlightenment, 
nationalism, radicalism, romanticism, realism, and the cult of science. Cross listed BIB 403. 
 
HIS 478 Senior History Seminar (3) (Fall) 
In this course, students delve into one topic of historiographical importance to introduce methods and philosophies of 
interpretation. Students learn to navigate the differing opinions of historians and to evaluate their use of historical 
knowledge to create persuasive historical narratives. Students will write a historiographical paper that will serve as an 
introduction to their final capstone research paper in HIS 480 Philosophy of History.  
Prerequisite: junior standing. 
 
HIS 480 Philosophy of History (3) (Spring) 
A seminar course. Examines the primary secular and religious philosophies of history, as well as the methods of 
historical logic, research, and writing. A research paper which delivered to the class as a formal presentation is 
required. It is recommended that students take HIS 478 Senior History Seminar before taking this course. 
Prerequisite: junior standing. 
 
HON (Honors) 
 
HON 234 Great Books of Community, Place and Responsibility (3) (Fall) 
Explores the virtues of compassion, hope, and justice within the context of local communities. Engages students in 
questions of local import for the investigation of what it means to love in place and with responsibility. Includes a 
local, experiential weekend. Focuses on a specific theme, time-period, and/or subject through which to explore the 
subject matter. In addition to affording the opportunity to create personal connections with different communities 
and ideas of responsibility, explores how cultural and governmental ideas and polices have caused and changed these 
communities. Texts are selected specifically for the chosen theme. 
 
HON 310 Great Books of World Literature (3) (Spring) 
Delves into the history of western literature, beginning with the Greeks, moving to the Romans, to the Medieval era, 
and into the works of Renaissance authors. Explores the interrelation between form and content, the development of 
generic characteristics, and the formation of Christian imagination in these periods. Introduces works such as the 
Odyssey, the Oresteia, Medea, Antigone, the Aeneid, Beowulf, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, the Divine Comedy, 
Paradise Lost, and Shakespeare selections. Emphasizes the practice the craft of close reading. 
 
HON 317 Great Books of Philosophy (3) (Fall) 
Introduces logic, philosophy of science, and traditional and contemporary answers to the problems of knowledge, 
reality, and morality through various primary source readings ranging from the pre-Socratics to Derrida.  
 
HON 327 Great Books of American History (3) (Spring) 
Provides an overview of North American History from the period surrounding European settlement to the present. 
Includes topics of European and Native American relations, the development of slavery, the American Revolution, and 
the Civil War, as well as the Progressive and New Deal eras, the World Wars, the Cold War, 1960s radicalism, and the 
rise of modern conservativism. Sources will range from Puritan sermons, Common Sense, and The Federalist Papers, 
 
 
 
 

  

 
to slave and feminist writings, presidential speeches, and civil rights treatises. 
 
HON 330 Great Books and the New Testament (3) (Fall) 
A survey of all 27 books of the New Testament and their cultural impact. Exams the books in their 1st century context, 
the history of interpretation of the New Testament, and the Wirkungsgeschichte (German for "history of the 
influence") of the New Testament. Special attention given to significant interpreters of the New Testament 
throughout history, such as Augustine and Luther, and to the role the New Testament has played in doctrinal debates, 
the formation of ethical systems, spiritual formation, and artistic productions. 
 
HON 334 Great Books of Christian Tradition (3) (Spring) 
Explores biblical and Christian literature as influences of the faith and practices of various Christian traditions and 
communities, primarily within Western culture. Introduces the rich resources of Scripture and Christian tradition for 
practiced personal faith and life in the modern world. Emphasizes developing a prayerful and living biblical theology 
and examines pairs of matching texts (spiritual and literary classics) to explore themes of faith and practice. 
 
HON 490 Senior Honors Project (0-3 credit hours) 
Students in the honors program will register for this course in the semester they complete their honors project. If 
students register for a 490 course within their major or use a project within a different upper-level major course with 
instructor and honors program director approval, they must register for HON 490 for 0 credit hours. 
 
HPR (Human Performance) 
 
HPR 101 Personal Fitness and Wellness (2) (Fall, Interim, Spring) 
Covers health-related fitness and the relationship between lifestyle, individual fitness level and chronic disease risk. 
Emphasis is given to cardiovascular health, nutrition and weight management, and stress reduction.  
 
HPR 151 Introduction to Health, Human Performance, and Recreation (3) (Fall) 
Explores the historical and philosophical bases of the physical education profession and examines social and 
educational trends impacting career options in exercise and sport. Majors should take HPR 153 Foundations of 
Physical Fitness, Health, and Wellness concurrently.  
 
HPR 153 Foundations of Physical Fitness, Health, and Wellness (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Comprehensive introduction to the assessment and development of physical fitness, health, and wellness, with 
emphasis on personal application and group leadership. Topics include all components of physical fitness, nutrition, 
stress management, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and metabolic disease.  
 
HPR 163 Introduction to Sports Management (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Explores important aspects of sports management and entertainment including current business-related topics of 
amateur and professional sports and the analysis of management and leadership skills. Topics include marketing 
strategies, advertising contracts, modes of communication, and revenue via radio, TV, and other digital means. 
Examines cost analysis related to sports teams and the role of the sports agent. 
 
HPR 178 Aerobic Activities (2) (Spring) 
Students gain competency in basic instruction of kickboxing, step, chair, water, line dance aerobics, aerobic games, 
and basic elements of exercise design and leadership, demonstrated through teaching experience.  
Prerequisite: HPR 153 Foundations of Physical Fitness, Health, and Wellness. 
 
HPR 179 Strength and Power Training (2) (Spring) 
Introduces fundamental concepts in structuring strength and power training programs for individuals from youth 
through adulthood in the context of a wide range of training environments, from athletic to general fitness settings.  
Prerequisite: HPR 153 Foundations of Physical Fitness, Health, and Wellness. 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
HPR 201 Teaching Elementary Health and Physical Education (2) (Fall, Spring) 
Meets health and physical education standards of the Michigan Department of Education for elementary certification. 
Addresses the health education standard (1.6) with its four competencies and the physical education standard (1.7) 
and its three competencies. Classroom and interactive activities included with pertinent peer practice teaching 
experience in both health and physical education. Cross listed EDU 201. 
 
HPR 281 Nutrition and Exercise (2) (Sites) 
Examines the nature and benefits of physical fitness in the adult years as well as nutrients and their role in maintaining 
optimal health and preventing disease. Emphasis is given to body composition, obesity, and energy balance, with 
attention to the scientific basis for modification of eating and exercise behaviors. 
 
IBS (International Business) 
 
IBS 223 Biblical Foundation of International Business (3) (Even Interims) 
A survey course with a biblical foundation. Integrates business and Christian principles for students exploring a career 
that applies business skills and talents to advance God’s kingdom. Examples from Scripture and global economy.  
 
IBS 305 Principles of International Business (3) (Spring) 
Explores key aspects of contemporary international business. Includes topics of international trade theory, trading 
patterns, foreign exchange rates and markets, strategic alliances, direct foreign investments, regional business issues, 
cultural, political and economic influences, and management practices. May include special topics in diversity and 
legal issues in international business, international marketing, and international finance.  
 
IBS 385 Practicum (3) (Fall, Spring, Summer) 
Completed in an organization with a global emphasis. Taken summer of the junior year or in the senior year. 
 
MAT (Mathematics) 
 
MAT 100 Introductory Algebra (3) (Fall) 
Properties and operations of the real number system; word problems involving integers, fractions, or decimals 
including percentages, ratios, and proportions; graphical representations of equations including tables and charts, 
one-and two-variable equations, and inequalities; word problems involving one and two variables; operation and 
properties of algebraic expressions and polynomials; problems involving geometric figures. Does not count toward 
General Education mathematics pathway. 
 
MAT 101 College Algebra (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Topics include algebraic and geometric properties of linear, quadratic, polynomial, rational, radical, absolute value, 
exponential, logarithmic functions, linear inequalities in one and two variables, and solving systems of equations. 
Applications in many areas. Does not count toward mathematics major or minor. Satisfies mathematics pathway. 
Prerequisites: "C" or better in MAT 100 Introductory Algebra, or one year of high school algebra or geometry and ACT 
math score of 18 to 23/SAT Math Test sub-score of 24. 
 
MAT 104 Mathematics for the Liberal Arts (3) (Interim, Spring, Online, Sites) 
Emphasizes the great ideas of mathematics and how a mathematician looks at the world including rigorous thinking, 
number theory, infinity, geometry, the fourth dimension, topology, chaos, and fractals, etc. Incorporates "life lessons" 
to draw from the methods of doing mathematics. 
Prerequisite: "C" or better MAT 100 Introductory Algebra with a "C" or higher or ACT 18 or higher/SAT Math Test sub-
score of 24 or higher. 
 
MAT 112 Precalculus (3) (Spring) 
Examines elementary functions to prepare students for the calculus sequence or courses in the sciences. Topics 
include properties of the real number system, inequalities and absolute value, functions and their graphs, solutions of 
equations, and polynomial, rational, radical, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in MAT 101 College Algebra or three years of high school math including two years of 
algebra with at least a "B" average. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
MAT 201 Calculus I (4) (Fall) 
Examines the differentiation and integration of functions including parametric equations and polar coordinates, 
sequences and series including Taylor’s formula, convergence tests, partial sums, and logistic and first order 
differential equations. Applications in both the physical and social sciences.  
Prerequisite: "B" or higher in MAT 112 Precalculus or high school precalculus with at least a "B". 
 
MAT 202 Calculus II (4) (Spring) 
Differentiation and integration of functions defined by parametric equations including polar coordinates, and 
applications of the calculus in the physical and social sciences. Sequences and series including Taylor’s formula and 
tests of convergence for sequences and series and determine the sum of an infinite series if it exists. Solve simple first 
order differential equations.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in MAT 201 Calculus I. 
 
MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures (3) (Fall) 
Functions, relations, sets, basic logic, proof techniques including mathematical induction, counting theory, graph and 
tree concepts, discrete probability, recurrence relations, algorithm development, and efficiency analysis. Cross listed 
CPS 232.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in MAT 112 Precalculus or high school math through precalculus with at least a "B" average. 
 
MAT 302 Vector Calculus (3) (Fall) 
Calculus of functions of two variables: limits, continuity, partial derivatives, chain rule, directional derivatives and the 
gradient, tangent planes and normals to surfaces, iterated integrals, cylindrical and spherical coordinates, curves in 
space, polar coordinates, line integrals, surface integrals, Green’s theorem, Stoke’s theorem, change of variable, 
Taylor’s expansion, implicit function theorem, and Divergence theorem.  
Prerequisite: MAT 202 Calculus II. 
 
MAT 311 Differential Equations (3) (Spring) 
Fundamental methods of solving differential equations of the first order, higher-ordered differential equations, both 
linear and nonlinear models, and solving systems of differential equations including phase plane analysis and the use 
of eigenvalues and eigenvectors and Laplace transform methods.  
Prerequisite: MAT 202 Calculus II. 
 
MAT 321 Abstract Algebra I (3) (Fall) 
Structure of our number system. Topics such as rings, fields, and integral domains are covered.  
Prerequisites: MAT 201 Calculus I and MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures. 
 
MAT 322 Abstract Algebra II (2) (Odd Springs) 
The structure of our number system with emphasis on group theory.  
Prerequisite: MAT 321 Abstract Algebra I. 
 
MAT 330 Foundations of School Mathematics I (3) (Fall) 
Fundamental concepts of mathematics for prospective teachers of grades K-8. Topics include strands I, IV and V from 
Michigan Curriculum Framework: patterns, relationships and structures, number sense and numeration, numerical 
and algebraic operations, and analytical thinking. Does not count toward mathematics major or minor. "B-" required 
for education majors. 
Prerequisite: EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
 
MAT 331 Foundations of School Mathematics II (3) (Spring) 
Fundamental concepts of mathematics for prospective teachers of grades K-8. Topics include strands II, III, VI from 
Michigan Curriculum Framework: geometry and measurement, data analysis and statistics, and probability and 
discrete mathematics. Does not count toward mathematics major or minor. "B-" required for education majors. 
Prerequisite: EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
 
MAT 342 Foundations of Secondary School Mathematics (3) (Even Springs)  
See EDU 342. 

 
 

 
 
MAT 351 Statistics (3) (Spring) 
Descriptive and inferential statistics including z- and t-tests for means and proportions, Chi-Square, ANOVA and 
regression. Topics from probability: sample space, events, additive rules, conditional probability, multiplicative rules, 
Bayes’ rule, random variables, discrete and continuous probability distributions, expected value, and Chebyshev’s 
theorem.  
Prerequisite: MAT 101 College Algebra or MAT 201 Calculus I. 
 
MAT 352 Linear Algebra (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines systems of linear equations and matrices, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, inner 
product spaces including the Gram-Schmidt process, and linear transformations. 
 Prerequisite: MAT 201 Calculus I. 
 
MAT 363 Theory of Probability I (3) (Limited) 
Topics include general probability (set functions including set notation and basic elements of probability, mutually 
exclusive events, addition and multiplication rules, independence of events, combinatorial probability, conditional 
probability – Non Bayes Theorem, Bayes Theorem/law of total probability), univariate probability distributions 
including binomial, negative binomial, geometric, hypergeometric, Poisson, uniform, exponential, chi-square, beta, 
Pareto, lognormal, gamma, Weibull, and normal (probability functions and probability density functions, cumulative 
distribution functions, conditional probability, mode, median, percentiles, and moments, variance and measures of 
dispersion, moment generating functions, and transformations. 
 Prerequisites: MAT 202 Calculus II and MAT 351 Statistics. 
 
MAT 364 Theory of Probability II (3) (Limited) 
Examines multivariate probability distributions including the bivariate normal (joint probability functions and joint 
probability density functions, joint cumulative distribution functions, central limit theorem, conditional and marginal 
probability distributions, and moments for joint, conditional, and marginal probability distributions), joint moment 
generating functions, variance and measures of dispersion for conditional and marginal probability distributions, 
covariance and measures of dispersion for conditional and marginal probability distributions, transformations and 
order statistics, and probabilities and moments for linear combinations of independent random variables.  
Prerequisite: MAT 363 Theory of Probability I. 
 
MAT 401 Real Analysis (3) (Even Springs) 
A rigorous treatment of the calculus of functions of one real variable. Formal proofs are given for the familiar 
theorems dealing with limits, continuity, differentiation, integration, sequences, and series. Special topics may include 
vector analysis, gamma functions, and Fourier analysis.  
Prerequisite: MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures. 
 
MAT 421 Modern Geometry (3) (Even Falls) 
A general overview of elementary geometry appropriate for all math majors and required of secondary education 
math majors. Primary emphasis on Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries with some discussion of finite, neutral, 
transformational, hyperbolic, and projective geometry. Consideration of historical development. 
Prerequisites: MAT 202 Calculus II and MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures. 
 
MAT 422 Seminar: Topics in Advanced Mathematics (1-3) (Limited) 
Designed to meet the current needs of the mathematics majors. Examples of topics include an introduction to 
topology, projective geometry, complex variables, and partial differential equations. 
Prerequisite: MAT 232 Proof and Discrete Structures. 
 
MHS (Management of Health Care Systems) 
 
MHS 231 Fiscal Management in Health Care Systems (3) (Online, Limited) 
Covers health finance and the role of the health care manager with emphasis on the analysis of financial information 
in relationship to health care costs and fiscal planning. Various study areas include payment and reimbursement 
systems, expense and cost reporting, budget management, and the use of basic accounting principles. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
MHS 342 Health Care Systems (3) (Online, Limited) 
Examines delivery and evaluation of health care in a variety of structures, such as inpatient and outpatient facilities, 
long term care, and managed care utilizing a systems approach. Focus on the health care professional and basic health 
care components of health promotion, psychological wellness, and health services for special populations. 
 
MHS 431 Administration of Health Care Systems (3) (Online, Limited) 
Focuses on the mission, values, and goals of health care organizations and the role of the health care manager within 
administration and human resources. Topics include managing the health care workforce, team building, recruiting 
and retention of workers, and patients’ rights and ethics faced in today’s health care environment.  
 
MHS 433 Health Care Systems Leadership (3) (Online, Limited) 
Topics include leadership and motivational theory as well as discovering and maximizing various leadership styles. 
Vision-casting and motivational theory are applied to both individual and group situations. 
 
MIS (Management Information Systems) 
 
MIS 301 Information Technology Management (3) (Limited) 
Introduction of organizations as systems, managerial decision-making processes, and the role of information 
technology and systems supporting management and operations.  
Prerequisites: BUS 162 Business Computer Applications and CPS 202 Coding II. 
 
MIS 403 Presentation of Data Analysis (1) (Even Springs) 
Provides the tools and practice for students to communicate to prospective clients and other constituents in 
organizations in nontechnical terms the findings and insights gathered from data analyses. Emphasis will be on 
developing effective written and verbal presentation skills built on previous communication coursework. 
 
MKT (Marketing) 
 
MKT 207 Advertising (3) 
See APR 207. 
 
MKT 221 Marketing Principles (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Functions and problems of the marketing process including financing, transportation, distribution, and some aspects 
of advertising and salesmanship. Students will be working with clients to put their knowledge and skills into practice. 
 
MKT 231 Creativity and Innovation (3) (Limited) 
Explores concepts of creative thinking and innovative decision making. Focuses on creative problem solving of 
marketing, public relations, and advertising situations, the marketing of new innovations, and exploration of the 
entrepreneurial stage of the product life cycle.  
 
MKT 275 Sales (3) (Odd Falls) 
Explores the theory, skills, and techniques for success in the field of sales, with emphasis on ethics and biblical values. 
 
MKT 309 Advertising Strategies (3) 
See APR 309. 
 
MKT 340 Consumer Relations (3) (Even Springs) 
Marketing strategy implications of consumer behavior, anthropology, economics, psychology, sociology, and the 
consumer.  
 
MKT 341 Retailing (3) (Odd Springs) 
Explores all activities involved in selling goods or services directly to final consumers. Topics include types and 
structures of retail operations, pricing and positioning stores in minds of consumers, marketing strategy for retailers, 
promotional strategies, growth of non-store retail and global retail operations.  
 

 
 

 
 
MKT 347 Public Relations (3) 
See APR 347. 
 
MKT 452 Marketing Research and Design (3) (Odd Falls) 
Covers defining, developing, and conducting marketing research, including the cultivation of critical thinking skills 
necessary to help determine an organization's competitive position and enhance the efficiency of products and 
services. Provides experience in research techniques including questionnaire design, focus groups, observational 
research, testing/sampling, results analysis, and statistical analysis of collected data.  
Prerequisite: MKT 221 Marketing Principles. 
Corequisite: BUS 351 Statistics. (May take prior to this course as a prerequisite.) 
 
MKT 461 Marketing Strategy (3) (Even Springs) 
Designed as a marketing capstone course, this course integrates content from previous coursework. Students develop 
competitive marketing strategies for various types of complex organizations.  
Prerequisite: MKT 221 Marketing Principles. 
 
MUS (Music) 
 
MUS 105 Music Theory I: Literacy (3) (Fall) 
Comprehensive study and application of the basic materials of music and the fundamentals of common practice 
harmony, with an emphasis on the development of analytical skills. Includes a survey of a wide range of musical styles 
and issues with an emphasis on cultural understanding and the challenges of preparing for a career in music. Practical 
application of the theory skills through ear training, sight-singing, error detection, and keyboard skills. 
 
MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony (3) (Spring) 
Expands study and development of the basic materials, fundamentals of common practice harmony, and analytical 
skills attained in MUS 105. Focus on chords and their construction, progression, and the principles of connection that 
govern them. Includes a study of traditional and contemporary music harmony, and student will build their own 
musical language. Includes a detailed examination of major and minor keys, scales, chords, voice-leading, and 
modulation. Emphasizes aural harmony as it relates to harmony and progression.  
Prerequisite: MUS 105 Music Theory I: Literacy. 
 
MUS 152 Music Foundations (2) (Fall, Interim, Spring, Online) 
Survey of music literature and history focusing on critical listening and empathy. Covers works by significant composers 
in terms of design, place in history, and aesthetic impact. Field trips may be taken to provide a greater understanding 
of various music forms. Student may not take both MUS 152 and MUS 220. Counts toward General Education. Does 
not count toward music major or minor. Online not available to main campus students. 
 
MUS 205 Music Theory III: Orchestration (3) (Odd Falls) 
Continuation of the theory track to orchestration. Study of traditional orchestral techniques as they apply to 
contemporary musical settings, idiomatic writing, instrumental characteristics, and concise notation for instruments 
and voices. Utilizes computer software appropriate for creating mockups of large orchestral works. Students 
orchestrate projects for and work with live instrumentalists and vocalists. Students complete written dictation, error-
detection, and transposition exercises. 
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II. 
 
MUS 206 Music Theory IV: Advanced Harmony (3) (Even Springs) 
Builds on previous levels of music theory and introduces compositional techniques pioneered in the 20th century 
European and American composers. Examines techniques through both classical and jazz/popular music contexts. 
Expands on harmony and scales, form, and advanced compositional and non-Western musical creation techniques. 
Includes aural harmony of chromatic, harmonic, and melodic elements. 
Prerequisite: MUS 205 Music Theory III. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
MUS 210* Applied Lessons (1) (Fall, Spring) 
One half-hour applied lesson per week per credit hour. May register for 2 credit hours per semester. May not be taken 
for audit except for majors or minors in music. Students required to attend three music department concerts. 
Corequisite: MUS 210YL Lab 
 
MUS 210B1 Applied Brass (1) 
MUS 210B2 Applied Brass (2) 
MUS 210C1 Applied Conducting (1) 
MUS 210C2 Applied Conducting (2) 
MUS 210D1 Applied Percussion (1) 
MUS 210D2 Applied Percussion (2) 
MUS 210G1 Applied Guitar (1)  
MUS 210G2 Applied Guitar (2) 
MUS 210H1 Applied Harp (1) 
MUS 210H2 Applied Harp (2) 
MUS 210M1 Applied Composition (1)  
MUS 210M2 Applied Composition (2)  
MUS 210O1 Applied Organ (1) 
MUS 210O2 Applied Organ (2)   
MUS 210P1 Applied Piano (1)  
MUS 210P2 Applied Piano (2)  
MUS 210S1 Applied Strings (1)  
MUS 210S2 Applied Strings (2)  
MUS 210V1 Applied Voice (1)  
MUS 210V2 Applied Voice (2)  
MUS 210W1 Applied Woodwinds (1) 
MUS 210W2 Applied Woodwinds (2) 
 
 
MUS 210YL Lab (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Student performances in a master class format and presentations by guest artists. All students registered for MUS210 
Applied Lessons are required to be enrolled in this lab class. Attendance at music labs can count towards the additional 
event attendance requirement. Students can perform in these labs with permission of their instructor. Graded "S"/"U." 
Corequisite: MUS 210* Applied Lessons 
 
MUS 212 Music Production I (2) (Spring) 
Explores the complex software of digital audio workstations through exercises and projects designed to strengthen 
technical understanding and heighten creative abilities in music production. Examines sound recording and playback, 
multichannel recording, sound synthesis, mixing, and digital sound effects.  
 
MUS 220 Music Appreciation (3) (Online) 
The student gains a thorough exposure to musical literature through extensive listening to examples of music by 
significant composers. Details of the lives of these composers are placed in historical perspective. During the course, a 
foundation is laid for a lifelong process of discovery and enjoyment of music. Students may not take both MUS 152 
and MUS 220. Does not count toward music major or minor. Main campus students may not take MUS 220. 
 
MUS 230* Instrumental Groups and Ensembles (1) (Fall, Spring) 
MUS 230B Brass Ensemble  
MUS 230C Concert Band 
Performs standard band literature including marches, contemporary composition, transcribed orchestral 
literature, and combined band and choral literature. Periodic public appearances are required. Open to interested 
and reasonably competent musicians. Placement is determined by audition or permission of instructor. 
MUS 230D Percussion Ensemble 
MUS 230F Flute Choir 
MUS 230G Guitar Ensemble 
MUS 230H Horn Ensemble 
MUS 230R Clarinet Ensemble 
MUS 230X Sax Ensemble 
MUS 230J Jazz Ensemble 
A 20-member group that performs big-band and jazz-oriented compositions. Membership is open by invitation 
and/or audition. 
 
MUS 230S String Orchestra 
A string orchestra performing a variety of music from the Baroque, Classical, Romantic and Contemporary 
periods. Membership is open by invitation or audition to students and community members with sufficient 
experience in violin, viola, cello or bass. 

 
 

 
 
MUS 240* Choral Groups (1) (Fall, Spring) 
MUS 240CC Chamber Choir 
The University’s select mixed ensemble performs a variety of literature (sacred and secular) for churches, schools 
and civic groups, and tours in selected years. Members are required to participate in both the fall and spring 
semesters unless prior permission is given to register for only one of the semesters. The Chamber Choir rehearses 
 on Tues., Thurs. and Fri. from 2:40-3:40. Audition required. 
MUS 240US University Singers 
A mixed ensemble that performs a variety of literature, both sacred and secular. Two on-campus concerts are 
given each semester with additional performance opportunities as they are presented. No audition required. 
 
MUS 250 Practicum in Pedagogy (1) (Fall, Spring) 
The "student teaching" segment of the piano or vocal pedagogy courses in the A.P.P. program or vocal pedagogy 
concentration in the music major. Includes instruction and record-keeping of lessons with one or two students and 
observation by and follow-up meetings with supervising faculty throughout the semester. A final paper is required. 
Prerequisites: enrolled in the A.P.P. program or a vocal pedagogy concentration in a music major, MUS 309 Piano 
Pedagogy or MUS 311 Vocal Pedagogy with a "B" or higher 
 
MUS 308 Survey of Keyboard Literature (2) (Odd Springs) 
Survey of keyboard literature and composers from the late 1500s through the 1900s and an in-depth study of the 
various style characteristics and performance practices of literature surveyed.  
Prerequisite: MUS 105 Music Theory I: Literacy or permission. 
 
MUS 309 Piano Pedagogy (3) (Odd Interims) 
Methods and techniques used in teaching piano. Emphasis on study of materials available. Required for keyboard 
majors and associate in piano pedagogy majors.  
Prerequisites: audition and/or two semesters of applied piano. 
 
MUS 310* Applied Lessons (Fall, Spring) 
One half-hour applied lesson per week for one semester hour of credit. Applied lessons may not be taken for audit. 
Two-credit (one clock hour) lessons must have the approval of the music department. Students will be required to 
attend 10 music department concerts (MUS310YL). Open only for music majors and minors. 
Corequisite: MUS 310YL Lab. 
 
MUS 310B1 Applied Brass (1) 
MUS 310B2 Applied Brass (2) 
MUS 310C1 Applied Conducting (1) 
MUS 310C2 Applied Conducting (2) 
MUS 310D1 Applied Percussion (1) 
MUS 310D2 Applied Percussion (2) 
MUS 310G1 Applied Guitar (1)  
MUS 310G2 Applied Guitar (2) 
MUS 310H1 Applied Harp (1) 
MUS 310H2 Applied Harp (2) 
MUS 310M1 Applied Composition (1)  
MUS 310M2 Applied Composition (2)  
MUS 310O1 Applied Organ (1) 
MUS 310O2 Applied Organ (2)   
MUS 310P1 Applied Piano (1)  
MUS 310P2 Applied Piano (2)  
MUS 310S1 Applied Strings (1)  
MUS 310S2 Applied Strings (2)  
MUS 310V1 Applied Voice (1)  
MUS 310V2 Applied Voice (2)  
MUS 310W1 Applied Woodwinds (1) 
MUS 310W2 Applied Woodwinds (2) 
 
 
MUS 310YL Lab (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Student performances in a master class format and presentations by guest artist. Attendance at all music labs is 
required, and students must perform in at least two labs per semester. Graded "S"/"U." 
Corequisite: MUS 310* Applied Lessons. 
 
MUS 311 Vocal Pedagogy (2) (Odd Springs) 
Methods and techniques used in teaching voice. Emphasis on study of the anatomy involved in vocal production. 
Required for music education majors. 
Prerequisite: two semesters of Applied voice. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
MUS 312 Diction (3) (Even Springs) 
Elementary singing pronunciation techniques in English, Latin, Italian, French, and German. Students prepare songs in 
all five languages. Required of vocal education majors and vocal performance majors.  
Prerequisite: two semesters of applied voice. 
 
MUS 313 The History and Literature of Music to 1750 (3) (Even Falls) 
Survey of the history and literature of music. Emphasis on style, periods, composers, and form. Covers medieval 
through baroque periods.  
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 314 The History and Literature of Music since 1750 (3) (Odd Falls) 
Survey of the history and literature of music. Emphasis on style, periods, composers, and form. Covers classical 
through 20th Century.  
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 315 Music Production II (4) (Odd Falls) 
Continuation of MUS 212. Students work independently and in groups to produce large audio projects such as an 
album of original or cover songs, a recording of an original composition or a video game soundtrack. Covers 
sequencing, recording, mixing, mastery of digital audio and MIDI, and distribution. 
Prerequisite: MUS 212 Music Production I. 
 
MUS 319 Methods and Materials for Teaching Music in the Elementary School (3) (Even Falls) 
Principles, methods, and materials for teaching general vocal and instrumental music in elementary schools. Includes 
20 hours of clinical and field experience. "B-" or better required. Cross listed EDU 319. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, 2.0 ("C") or better in EDU 202 Issues and Trends in American Education and EDU 230 
Educational Psychology, or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
MUS 323 World Music (2) (Even Interims) 
A survey of traditional music outside the Western Classical heritage, including genres from Africa, South America, East 
Asia, the South Pacific, the Middle East, and Europe. Special emphasis is given to the role of music within culture. 
 
MUS 324 Vocal Literature (2) (Odd Falls) 
Survey of vocal literature and composers from the late 1500s through the 1900s and in-depth study of the various 
style characteristics and performance practices of literature surveyed.  
 
MUS 325 Scoring for Media (2) (Odd Springs) 
Focus on aesthetics, terminology, procedures, and technical aspects of film scoring. Application of these skills in 
scoring a short film. 
Prerequisites: MUS 212 Music Production I and MUS 206 Music Theory IV: Advanced Harmony. 
 
MUS 332 Brass Methods (1) (Odd Falls) 
Explores playing and teaching techniques of brass instruments. Some skill on various instruments is expected.  
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 333 Percussion Methods (1) (Odd Springs) 
Explores fundamental techniques of playing and teaching the percussion instruments. Minimal proficiency on the 
various instruments is expected.  
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 336 String Methods (1) (Even Falls) 
Explores fundamental techniques of playing and teaching the string instruments. Minimal proficiency on the various 
instruments is expected.  
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
MUS 337 Woodwind Methods (1) (Even Springs) 
Explores fundamental techniques of playing and teaching the woodwind instruments. Minimal proficiency on the 
various instruments is expected. 
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 338 Survey of Instrumental Techniques (2) (Odd Falls) 
Study of basic performance and pedagogy skills for wind, string, and percussion instruments.  
 
MUS 341 Marching Band Materials and Methods (1) (Odd Interims) 
Specialized study of the techniques and skills associated with the preparation and management of marching bands, 
including organization, show design, music arranging, teaching of marching fundamentals, and rehearsal of marching 
routines and show music. Also included will be specific instruction on working with percussion sections and auxiliary 
units. Required for instrumental music education majors. 
 
MUS 349 Methods and Materials for Teaching Music in the Secondary School (3) (Odd Falls) 
Procedures for teaching vocal and instrumental music in the secondary school, as well as philosophy and principles of 
secondary school music curriculum design. Emphasis on organization, administration and pedagogy for ensemble 
instruction. Includes 20 hours of clinical and field experience. Cross listed EDU 349. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, and "C" or better in each EDU 202 Issues and Trends in American Education, EDU 230 
Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development, and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
MUS 363 Conducting (2) (Even Falls) 
Fundamentals of choral and instrumental conducting with emphasis on gestures, score study, and rehearsal methods. 
Prerequisite: MUS 106 Music Theory II: Harmony. 
 
MUS 386 Junior Recital (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Requirement for music majors in preparation for MUS 486 Professional Recital.  
 
MUS 390 Independent Study (1-4) (Limited) 
A research project for music majors in their junior or senior year. Project should involve research into the history, 
pedagogy, or performance practices of their principal instrument. Variable credit approved by instructor. 
 
MUS 461 Rehearsal Strategies (2) (Even Springs) 
A capstone course for music education majors prior to student teaching. Topics include advanced conducting, artistic 
decision-making, rehearsal planning and organization, error detection in the rehearsal setting, motivational aspects 
for performing ensembles, and ensemble evaluation as an adjudicator. 
Prerequisite: MUS 363 Conducting. 
 
MUS 480 Theory Seminar (2) (Even Falls) 
Application of music theory skills to advanced topics including detailed analysis of extended works, orchestration, 
arranging, and composition.  
Prerequisite: MUS 206 Music Theory IV: Advanced Harmony. 
 
MUS 486 Professional Recital (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Graduation requirement for all music majors. Graded "S"/"U." 
Prerequisite: MUS 386 Junior Recital. 
 
MUS 487 Piano Proficiency (0) (Fall, Spring) 
Graduation requirement for all music majors. Graded "S"/"U." 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
NSC (Natural Science) 
 
NSC 200 Elementary Science Survey – Science by Inquiry (4) (Fall) 
A survey course of life science, physical science, and earth/space science taught in an inquiry format. Students learn 
science concepts through inquiry-based activities as well as more traditional teaching methods. Technology activities 
are integrated into the science conceptual material. Ability to work independently and responsibly is essential. "B-" or 
better required.  
Prerequisites: teacher education only, sophomore status. 
 
NUR (Nursing) 
 
NUR 200 Medical Terminology (2) (Interim Online) 
Introduces medical terminology as the study of principles of medical word building to help students develop the 
extensive medical vocabulary used in health care occupations. Provides a thorough grounding in basic medical 
terminology through a study of root words, prefixes, and suffixes. Focuses on correct pronunciation, spelling, and use 
of medical terms. Covers anatomy, physiology, and pathology of disease. 
 
NUR 201 Fundamentals of Nursing (4) (Fall) 
Introduces basic nursing skills; a brief overview of the history of nursing; contributions of selected nursing leaders; the 
influence of social change on the development and image of the profession; the diversity of today’s nursing roles and 
practice settings; and ethical, legal, and political considerations related to the profession. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 201L. 
 
NUR 203 Physical and Health Assessment (3) (Fall) 
Provides the framework for preparing students to perform comprehensive health assessments on patients across the 
lifespan. Presents the theoretical foundation for basic assessment and nursing skills. Emphasis placed on nursing 
history; performing physiological, psychological, sociological cultural, and spiritual assessment; and identifying 
stressors and health risks. Includes lab to practice assessment skills on adult patients. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 203L. 
 
NUR 321 Professionalism/Professional Values (3) (Online) 
Develops and strengthens core professional values by emphasizing the pursuit of practice excellence. Examines the 
ANA Standards & Scope of Nursing Practice and Ethical Code for Nurses as well as professional associations and 
regulating bodies. Explores the role of nursing theory to guide practice and provides foundational professional 
concepts in legal, ethical, and patient-centered care in preparation for future courses across the educational 
continuum and roles in advanced practical nursing. "C" or better is required to progress in the program. 
 
NUR 324 Community Health Theory/Clinical (4) (Spring) 
Focuses on meeting the wholeness needs of families, groups, and communities. The nursing process is applied to 
select problems in the community and the needs of select populations. Students practice family and community client 
assessment and provide holistic care for these groups in appropriate/applicable settings. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 324L. 
 
NUR 325 Medical Surgical Theory/Clinical I (6) (Spring) 
Assists students in applying principles from nursing, basic sciences, and liberal arts in care to adult clients through the 
nursing process. Students practice caring behaviors and promote and maintain client adaptation/wholeness with 
more complex needs, including disturbance in nutrition, oxygenation, metabolism, and loss of body integrity. 
Laboratory and client care experiences in institutional settings where students utilize assessment and advanced 
psychomotor skills. Students are expected to establish and maintain therapeutic relationships, begin educating and 
advocating for clients, and collaborate with other members of the health care team. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: "B-" in NUR 201 Fundamentals of Nursing and NUR 203 Physical and Health Assessment. 
Corequisite: NUR 325L. 
 
NUR 326 Medical Surgical Theory/Clinical II (6) (Fall) 
Laboratory and client care experiences in institutional settings. Students utilize their assessment and advanced 

 
 

 
 
psychomotor skills and are expected to establish and maintain therapeutic relationships, to begin educating and 
advocating for clients, and to collaborate with other members of the health care team. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: "B-" in NUR 325 Medical Surgical Theory /Clinical I. 
Corequisite: NUR 326L. 
 
NUR 327 Mental Health Theory/Clinical (4) (Spring) 
Focuses on the use of nursing process in the application of psychiatric/mental health principles. Students are exposed 
to a variety of therapies and nursing roles in the care of clients with alterations in mental health. Clinical application 
takes place in a variety of community and institutional mental health settings. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 327L.  
 
NUR 328 OB and Women’s Health Theory/Clinical (5) (Fall) 
A theoretical basis for the application of the nursing process to families in the childbearing cycle, including families 
experiencing altered responses. Emphasis on caring, promotion, maintenance, and restoration through examination 
of families’ antepartal, intrapartal and postpartal experience, including care of the newborn. Covers a holistic 
approach to learning the physical, emotional, spiritual, psychosocial, and cultural aspects of women’s health. 
Application takes place in outpatient settings and birthing centers. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 328L. 
 
NUR 329 Pediatric Theory/Clinical (5) (Fall) 
Emphasizes the use of the nursing process in caring for families as they respond to well and ill children. Designed to 
enhance the knowledge base of students in pediatric nursing and provide opportunities to deliver comprehensive 
nursing care. Includes clinical application in a variety of settings. "B-" or better required. 
Corequisite: NUR 329L. 
 
NUR 341 Patient-centered Care I (3) (Online) 
Focuses on gerontology that utilizes the principles and techniques of holistic nursing assessment and care planning 
guided by evidence-based interventions and nursing theory. Explores the ways an aging population affects the health 
care system and nursing practice. Nursing assessment incorporates review of systems, health promotion, preventative 
care need and palliative care planning. Simulation is introduced. 
 
NUR 344 Clinical Prevention/Population Health (3) (Online) 
Discusses theory and concepts of community/public/global health, including health care systems in transition, health 
policy, and epidemiology. The Community Health Nurse’s (PH/CHN) partnership with the community in health 
promotion, disease, and injury prevention and population health are applied to patient scenarios. Students utilize 
teaching, learning, and behavioral change theories and concepts to plan care. 
 
NUR 360 Information Management/Patient Care Technologies (3) (Online) 
Emphasizes the use of technology and information systems for clinical decision-making. Emphasizes skills necessary to 
use information management and patient care technologies safely and effectively. Explores quality improvement 
information systems that monitor patient outcomes, required regulatory reporting, and ethical and legal issues related 
to the use of IT, including copyright, privacy, and confidentiality. 
 
NUR 422 Spiritual Dimensions of Health Care (3) (Online) 
Examines the increasing emphasis on spiritual well-being and healing environments as elements of health care. 
Explores techniques and emphases from a Christian perspective. Students complete a spiritual assessment and care 
plan using the nursing process. 
 
NUR 424 Medical Surgical Theory/Clinical III (6) (Spring) 
Focuses on care for clients and families across the life-span who are experiencing major and life-threatening 
disturbances in wholeness. Explores application of crisis theory, adaptation theory, and principles of critical care 
within the context of the nursing process. Clinical includes direct care to clients with complex wholeness needs and 
observational experiences in a variety of settings. "B-" or better required.  
Prerequisite: "B-" in NUR 326 Medical Surgical Theory/Clinical II 
Corequisite: NUR 424L 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
NUR 425 Nursing Leadership and Transition (5) (Spring) 
Explores the nurse’s role as leader and manager in client care, the nursing care delivery system, and the health care 
system. Students are expected to assess their own philosophies of leadership and nursing care management. 
Designed to help students prepare for the transition into professional nursing practice. "B-" or better required. 
 
NUR 426 Evidence-based Practice (4) (Fall Online) 
Designed to guide students to identify practice issues, appraise and integrate evidence and evaluate outcomes. 
Students learn the value of EBP, models for applying evidence, and the basic difference between qualitative and 
quantitative research methods. Explores rights of human subjects and the nurse's advocacy role in research studies. 
Library databases are used to collect strong evidence for EBP decisions. Students learn to identify the necessary 
components of good research and critically appraise research articles. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: HES 351 Statistics 
 
NUR 434 Quality Leadership (3) (Online) 
Focuses on the professional nurse’s role in applying the principles of leadership and management to navigate systems 
in health care organizations across the continuum of care. Explores the nurse leader’s role in quality and safety, the 
regulatory environment, policy, and advocacy for EBP. Provides opportunities to improve critical reasoning, 
interdisciplinary communication techniques, and conflict resolution. Practical application of change management and 
conflict resolution theories. 
 
NUR 442 Patient-centered Care II (3) (Online) 
Investigates evidence-based health techniques for disease prevention, health promotion, and self-management of 
chronic conditions. Explores adult assessment and health history interview techniques through simulation. The 
assessment findings are used to formulate a holistic, culturally sensitive health promotion plan and apply a theorist as 
a basis for care. Focuses on effective communication in facilitating client movement toward health and wellness. 
 
NUR 443 NCLEX Review (3) (Spring) 
Taken in the last semester before graduation. Designed to provide senior nursing students the opportunity to review 
theoretical and clinical material in preparation for the NCLEX. Students will learn critical thinking skills and appropriate 
testing strategies to enable them to successfully pass the NCLEX. "B-" or better required. 
 
NUR 452A Evidence-based Practice I (1) (Online) 
Guides students to identify practice issues, appraise and integrate evidence, and evaluate outcomes. Students learn 
the value of EBP models for applying evidence and the basic difference between qualitative and quantitative research 
methods. Explores the rights of human subjects, the advocacy role of the nurse in research studies, and library 
databases for collecting strong evidence for EBP decisions. "C" or better required. 
 
NUR 452B Evidence-based Practice I (1) (Online) 
Students learn to identify the necessary components of good research and critically appraise research articles. "C" or 
better required. 
 
NUR 452C Evidence-based Practice I (1) (Online) 
Databases are explored to collect evidence for a topic suitable for the senior project and the literature review is 
initiated. "C" or better required. 
 
NUR 453A Evidence-based Practice II (1) (Online) 
Reviews basic elements and concepts of the research process including levels of measurement, measurement tools, 
data presentation, and descriptive statistics. NUR 453A, B, and C fulfill the math General Education requirement. 
 
NUR 453B Evidence-based Practice II (1) (Online) 
Practice with Excel for statistical equations in preparation for the utilization of nursing research and data to make 
evidence-based practice changes. Integration of the most widely used statistical methods and the use of Excel 
promotes deeper understanding within the context of health care research and evidence based nursing practice. NUR 
453A, B, and C fulfill the math General Education requirement. 
 
 

 
 

 
 
NUR 453C Evidence-based Practice II (1) (Online) 
Additional concepts of statistical analysis and major epidemiological study designs are explored. Statistical concepts 
are applied to evidence based nursing practice. NUR 453A, B, and C fulfill the math General Education requirement. 
 
NUR 494 Senior Nursing Project (2) (Online) 
Provides students with the practical experience of applying and integrating the concepts and theories learned so far in 
the program. Students assess and identify a patient safety or care process problem, a practice discrepancy, or an 
educational need supported by research. Students develop a research question and complete a comprehensive 
literature review, scholarly paper, and present findings in a poster presentation. "C+" or better required. 
 
ORM (Organizational Management) 
 
ORM 368 Financial Resources Management (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines the basic concepts of financial management, commonly used financial terms, development of financial 
statements, and the integral role financial management plays corporate business strategy. Topics include balance 
sheets, income statements, statement of cash flows, annual reports, financial ratios, time value of money, breakeven 
calculations, and annual budget. 
 
ORM 403 Organizational Behavior (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines key theories within the field of organizational behavior and their practical implications. Considers 
organizational, group, and individual-level behaviors. Topics explored include leadership styles, performance, 
motivation, group dynamics, interpersonal relationships, and other related sub-topics. 
 
ORM 405 Leadership Development (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines various theories and approaches to leadership and their applications/implications in a managerial setting. 
Topics explored include servant leadership, contingency theory of leadership, traits of effective leaders, and the 
comparison of management versus leadership. 
 
ORM 411 Project Management (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines principles of project management as part of leading contemporary organizations. Students learn to lead and 
manage projects to bring tangible results to organizations and examine best practices, helping them gain practical 
skills to employ for organizational success and personal career advancement.  
 
ORM 412 Lean Management (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Students gain lean management skills from the best of both manufacturing and service industries. Originated from 
Japan under the name Kaisen, lean management has become a state-of-the-art tool for continuous improvement and 
quality management through systematic elimination of waste and strategically creating values for the end customers. 
Students examine best practices that they can employ readily for organizational success and personal career 
advancement. 
 
ORM 413 Organizational Diagnosis and Consulting (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines consulting practices to facilitate organizational change and the role and functions of organizational 
consultants. Topics include assessing organizations, diagnosing problems that hinder growth, presenting solutions 
within organizational constraints, and evaluating the outcomes of the solution.  
 
ORM 432 Human Resource Management (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Explores concepts and theories of human resource management necessary for understanding and applying principles 
and practices related to planning, recruitment, selection, utilization, and labor relations. Special attention is given to 
the legal environment and to management and human resources supervisory issues. Accomplishing human resource 
management functions in different-sized organizations will be considered. 
 
ORM 443 Organizational Design and Strategy (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines the history, dynamics, and current state of organizational design, strategy, and leadership. Topics include 
organizational structure, decision-making, environmental issues, and corporate social responsibility. 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
ORM 462 Organizational Change (3) (Video Conference, Online) 
Examines organizational change concepts necessary for identifying an organization’s systems and recognizing 
organizational influences in order to research and develop an effective written formal business proposal which is 
orally presented to the instructor and learning group. 
 
PHI (Philosophy) 
 
PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy (3) (Fall, Spring, Sites, Online) 
Introduction to logic, philosophy of science, and traditional and contemporary answers to the human problems of 
knowledge, reality, and morality. 
 
PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews (3) (Limited) 
Introduces and examines the major belief systems found in our contemporary world: theism, deism, naturalism, 
nihilism, existentialism, Islam, eastern religious thought, new age teaching, post-modernism, and other beliefs as 
reflected in pop culture. Explores non-western views of reality found in much of the world (animism/Spiritism) and 
compares to the western secular worldview.  
 
PHI 301 Great Thinkers of the Western World (3) (Even Springs) 
A survey of the greatest minds and ideas through the history of the Western World. Introduces prominent thinkers 
from the Pre-Socrates to the 21st century. Examines Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, Hume and Kant, 
pragmatism, positivism, and existentialism through discussion and primary source readings.  
Prerequisite: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews. 
 
PHI 314 Ethics (3) (Spring, Online) 
Analyzes selected current and vital, moral problems such as those in medical, legal, and political ethics; race, sex and 
other forms of discrimination; the impact of technology in human values; war and peace; and poverty and hunger. 
Topics vary with concerns of students. Ethical resources are the great philosophers as well as Christian thinkers. It is 
advisable for students to complete PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or equivalent prior to taking this course for 
adequate prerequisite knowledge needed for course success. 
 
PHI 316 Western Political Thought (3) (Even Falls) 
See POL 316. 
 
PHI 318 War and Peace (3) (Odd Springs) 
Considers the question of the ethics of war and violence from a biblical, theological, and historical perspective and 
examines the biblical and theological criteria and arguments surrounding war and violence. The Pacifist tradition and 
Just War tradition will be central to the discussion. Recent and current global events are considered, as well as 
practical application for faithful, Christian living in church and society.  
 
PHI 334 Critical Thinking (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduction to epistemology; critical thinking; basic reasoning, logic, and rhetoric; argumentative essay writing; and 
oral presentation. Examines epistemological theory, language theory, common fallacies, deductive and inductive 
reasoning, and the evaluation of evidence and credibility of arguments. 
Prerequisite: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews. 
 
PHI 381 Philosophy of Religion (3) (Odd Falls) 
Evaluates the ideas of religion in a philosophical manner; the reliability of the theistic hypothesis; the nature of 
acceptable evidence and the possibility of religious knowledge; and alternatives, positions, and key problems of 
freedom, determinism, and evil.  
Prerequisite: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews. 
 
PHI 394 World Religions (3) 
See REL 394.  
  
 
 

 
 

 
 
PHI 401 Philosophy of Science (3) (Limited) 
Examines the relationship between the Christian faith and the natural sciences. Covers a range of topics from 
evolution and creationism to stem cell research and genetic modification. Besides exploring the theoretical roots, this 
course will have a pragmatic component. 
Prerequisite: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews. 
 
PHI 402 Environmental Ethics (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduces philosophical ethics through engagement with environmental issues such as population growth and 
resource use, sustainability, non-human and animal warfare, biodiversity loss, environmental justice, and global 
climate change. Students consider prominent questions and themes in environmental ethics, including a study of 
theoretical approaches to nature and animals and the place of human beings in the environment, as well as a number 
of issues that raise ethical questions in the context of environmental philosophy, such as ecojustice, pollution, 
consumption, economics, poverty, politics, education, place, lifestyle, restoration, and wilderness.  
Prerequisite: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy or PHI 210 Survey of Worldviews 
 
PHI 483 Seminar in Philosophy (3) (Limited) 
In-depth study of particular problems in philosophy. A different topic will be chosen each time it is offered. 
Prerequisite: 12 credit hours of philosophy or instructor’s permission. 
 
PHI 490 Philosophy Honors Project (3-6) (Limited) 
An opportunity for a student to do a significant project of scholarly productivity and/or research in philosophy. The 
student must have senior status and a GPA of 3.50 in the major. 
 
PHY (Physics) 
 
PHY 102 Conceptual Physics (4) (Odd Falls) 
A liberal arts physics course emphasizing scientific literacy, modern physics, societal connections, and appropriate 
quantitative skills at a basic math level. Practical laboratory exercises. 
 
PHY 120 Introduction to Earth Science (4) (Spring) 
Surveys the earth’s interior, surface, and atmosphere with emphasis on physical geology. Origin and identification of 
rocks, minerals, landforms, features of the ocean floor and currents, atmospheric circulation. Includes lab. Course fee. 
 
PHY 131 Meteorology and Planetary Science (4) (Even Falls) 
Includes a Christian perspective on the history and concepts of meteorology and planetary science. Labs cover the 
investigation of meteorological phenomenon in both a laboratory and real-world setting using data collected by 
students as well as data provided by governmental weather agencies. Lab fee included. 
 
PHY 201 General Physics I (4) (Fall) 
Trigonometry-based, classical physics with applications to the life sciences, including mechanics, 
thermodynamics, material properties and waves. Includes lab.  
Prerequisites: MAT 101 College Algebra or MAT 112 Precalculus or equivalent high school course. 
Corequisite: PHY 201L. 
 
PHY 202 General Physics II (4) (Spring) 
Continuation of PHY 201. Trigonometry-based, modern physics with applications to the life sciences. Topics include 
electromagnetism, optics, relativity, quantum physics, atoms, molecules, solids, nuclei, and quarks. Includes lab. 
Prerequisite: PHY 201 General Physics I 
Corequisite: PHY 202L. 
 
PHY 211 Modern University Physics I (4) (Fall) 
Calculus-based, classical physics including mechanics, thermodynamics, and waves. Includes lab. 
Corequisites: PHY 211L and MAT 201 Calculus I (MAT 202 Calculus II is recommended). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
PHY 212 Modern University Physics II (4) (Spring) 
Continuation of PHY 211. Calculus-based. Modern physics. Electromagnetism, optics, relativity, quantum physics, 
atoms, molecules, solids, nuclei, and quarks. Includes lab.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in PHY 211 Modern Physics I. 
Corequisite: PHY 212L. 
 
PHY 311 Electromagnetism (4) (Limited) 
The phenomena of static and dynamic electromagnetic fields. Maxwell’s equations developed and applied to various 
situations, including potentials due to conductors of different geometries, radiation, electromagnetic waves, waves in 
plasmas, and some topics from special relativity.  
Prerequisite: PHY 212 Modern University Physics II (MAT 311 Differential Equations is recommended). 
 
PHY 321 Intermediate Mechanics (4) (Limited) 
Vector analysis, statics, and dynamics of rigid bodies, particle dynamics, central forces, and simple harmonic 
oscillators with emphasis placed on the mathematical modeling of physical motions.  
Prerequisites: PHY 212 Modern University Physics II and MAT 311 Differential Equations. 
 
PHY 349 Electronics (4) (Limited) 
Introduction to electronic devices and circuitry. AC and DC circuits, instrumentation, diodes, transistors, sintransistor 
amplifiers, operational amplifiers, and selected specific devices. Includes lab. 
Prerequisite: PHY 202 General Physics II or PHY 212 Modern University Physics II. 
 
PHY 350 Intermediate Laboratory (3) (Limited) 
Principles of experimental research, with problems and applications in the areas of atomic and nuclear physics. Covers 
experimental design, data acquisition, and reduction and reporting of results. Specific lab techniques, such as vacuum 
technology, with use of magnets and the use of electronic instrumentation. 
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. 
 
PHY 351 Heat and Thermodynamics (4) (Limited) 
Thermal expansion, calorimetry, specific heat, change of state, heat transfer, thermodynamics laws, elementary 
kinetic theory and statistical mechanics, entropy, and other thermodynamic functions. 
Prerequisites: PHY 212 Modern University Physics II and MAT 202 Calculus II. 
 
PHY 372 Atomic and Nuclear Physics (4) (Limited) 
Atomic and atomic/molecular spectra and structure, radiation detection, radioactivity, particle detection, nuclear 
structure, and related topics. 
Prerequisites: PHY 212 Modern University Physics II and MAT 202 Calculus II. 
 
POL (Politics) 
 
POL 213 American National Government (3) (Fall, Online) 
A study of the structure and direction of the federal system, concentrating on various overlapping aspects of the 
national government. Policy issues, such as welfare, preservation of the environment, social security, and foreign 
affairs are seen from the "top-down" point of view of national norms and their impact on other levels of government, 
individuals, and communities. 
 
POL 214 State and Local Government (3) (Online) 
A study of the structure and direction of state, county, and local governments, focusing on how they function together 
and how they relate to the national government. Examines how policy issues, such as welfare, the environment, social 
security, and zoning originate at "lower" levels, yet do so within the guidelines and constraints of the national agenda. 
 
POL 230 Contemporary World Affairs (3) (Even Falls) 
Examines contemporary events of the world, emphasizing critical use newspapers, journals of opinion, electronic 
media, and library materials. Discusses Christian perspectives and diverse views on current topics. Cross listed HIS 230.  
 

 
 

 
 
POL 236 Christianity and Politics (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines ancient civilizations, especially Greece and Rome, as background to Christianity, and surveys key Christian 
individuals and movements, such as Roman Catholicism (Augustine/Aquinas), Luther, Calvin, Anabaptists, Wesleyans, 
Christian socialism, Conservatism, and Christian Coalition. Covers questions dealing with the nature of the state and 
what difference Christianity makes on public policy. Cross listed HIS 236.  
 
POL 311 Comparative Government (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines political culture, behavior, and institutions of the governments of Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia, 
Japan, and selected other countries. Emphasizes geography and history as vital factors in understanding politics. 
Explores the government of one other sovereign state in the contemporary world. Compares political systems to lead 
students to consider the elements of a "good" government.  
 
POL 312 International Relations (3) (Even Springs) 
Examines the background of international politics and forces, organizations, and laws influencing international 
relations within the present state system. 
 
POL 313 America in the 1960s (3) 
See HIS 313.  
 
POL 316 Western Political Thought (3) (Even Falls) 
Covers approaches to building human community and organizing power developed by classic philosophers of 
antiquity: Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, and Aquinas, and by the fathers of contemporary social thought: Machiavelli, 
Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Kant. Cross listed PHI 316.  
 
POL 322 Globalization: International Economics in the Information Age (3) 
See ECN 322. 
 
POL 334 The Middle East (3) 
See HIS 334. 
 
POL 335 East Asia (3) 
See HIS 335. 
 
POL 351 Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences (3) 
See PSY 351.  
 
POL 352 Research Design (3) 
See PSY 352. Prerequisite: POL 351. 
 
POL 368 Diplomatic History (3) 
HIS 368.  
 
POL 412 Constitutional Law (3) (Even Falls) 
A case approach to constitutional principles, organization of the U.S. judiciary, limits of state action, and protection of 
civil liberties.  
 
POL 484 Spirituality, Faith, and Justice (3) 
See SOC 484.  
 
PSY (Psychology) 
 
PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology (3) (Fall, Spring, Online, Sites) 
Provides a broad, general introduction to the discipline of psychology. Topics include personality theory, 
psychophysiology, learning, developmental psychology, motivation, abnormal behavior, psychotherapy, and social 
psychology. Introductory psychology students will be exposed to the approaches of gathering and evaluating evidence 
 
 
 
 

  

 
about the causes and correlates of behavior. Emphasizes the means by which psychological knowledge is, or can be, 
applied to improve the quality of individual and community life.  
Prerequisite: ENG 104 College Writing (may be taken concurrently). 
 
PSY 103 Psychology Seminar I (1) (Spring) 
Introduces students to psychology as a science and professional discipline and the particulars of the psychology major. 
Students navigate a variety of methods to access scholarly resources needed for study in the field of psychology. 
Explores the relationship between psychology and the Christian faith. 
 
PSY 203 Psychology Seminar II (1) (Fall) 
A continuation of PSY 103 with additional activities that are designed to sharpen verbal and written communication, 
engage critical and creative thinking skills, increase self and other awareness, and focus on career plans.  
 
PSY 240 Health Psychology (3) (Spring) 
Focuses on current research on wellness through personal exercises. Students learn how to identify sources of stress 
and coping resources. Emphasizes how stress physiology impacts mental and physical health. Students conceptualize 
wellness as it relates to such fields as psychology, business, and athletics, which they apply to their personal lives.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 242 Death, Grief and Loss (3) 
See SOC 242. 
 
PSY 246 Substance Abuse and Society (3) 
See SOC 246.  
 
PSY 253 Forensic Psychology (3) (Spring) 
Provides a broad perspective of the field of forensic psychology and covers the role that psychology has played in the 
legal system. Covers issues of morality, criminal suspect evaluation, jury selection, trial consultation, child custody 
evaluation, expert witness testimony, sexual offense or other dangerous behaviors, employment selection, and 
eyewitness identification. Students focus on an area of interest through a group research project. Cross listed CRJ 253. 
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 300 Infant and Early Childhood Development (3) (Fall) 
Explores the healthy development of infants and young children (ages 0-8) and factors that influence fertilization and 
prenatal development. Examines biosocial, cognitive, and psychosocial aspects of development. Considers 
developmental disorders and evidence-based interventions.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 301 Positive Psychology (3) (Fall) 
Examines the scientific areas of the study and application of that which is good in people. Includes study of positive 
subjective experiences such as happiness, well-being, optimism, gratitude, forgiveness, and hopefulness. Examines 
character traits such as altruism and resilience.  
Prerequisite: "C" or better in PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 303 Psychology Seminar III (1) (Spring) 
A continuation of PSY 203 Psychology Seminar II with additional activities focused on ethical thinking. Students will 
also explore opportunities for internships and/or eventual plans after graduation.  
 
PSY 305 Abnormal Psychology (3) (Fall) 
Introduces students to the major psychological disorders with a primary focus on diagnosis, etiology, and treatment of 
abnormal behavior.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 306 Middle Childhood and Adolescent Development (3) (Spring) 
Focuses on the psychological, social, and physical development of middle childhood through adolescence, as well as 

 
 

 
 
the major theories, concepts, and issues related to this age range. Students will have an opportunity to apply what 
they are learning to their own personal lives.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 309 Lifespan Development (3) (Fall) 
Provides students with an integrated approach to the biosocial, cognitive, and psychosocial aspects of human 
development across the lifespan and in a variety of multicultural contexts.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 320 Psychology of Sport (3) (Limited) 
Provides a broad perspective of the development of sport psychology and its application to the world of sport, 
performance, and exercise. Cross listed HES 320. 
 
PSY 321 Cognitive Psychology (2) (Spring) 
Introduces cognitive psychology through examining major cognitive psychology theories and research. 
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 342 Application of Behavioral Principles (2) (Spring) 
An exploration of behavioral learning principles and application of these learning principles for children and adults. 
Both research and effective intervention and treatment planning are emphasized.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 351 Statistics for Behavioral Sciences (3) (Fall, Online) 
Introduces applied statistics that uses statistical computer software. Includes types of variables (nominal, ordinal and 
interval/ratio), frequency and percentage distributions, graphical representations of data, measures of central 
tendency, dispersion and confidence intervals, hypothesis testing for statistical significance is done via CHI Square, t-
tests (for independent and dependent samples), ANOVA, correlation, and simple linear regression. Multiple linear 
regression may be included. "C" or better required for social work majors. Cross listed POL 351, SOC 351, SWK 351. 
 
PSY 352 Research Design (3) (Spring) 
An overview of major research methodologies in the behavioral sciences, especially intended for psychology, 
sociology, social work, and political science majors. Introduces conceptualization and measurement, 
operationalization, construction of indexes, scales, typologies and sampling techniques, diversity issues, and research 
ethics. Covers basic methods for experiments, survey research, field research, program evaluation, and case studies. 
Centers around an original research project using APA Publication Manual guidelines. Uses MICROCASE computer 
statistical software curriculum. Cross listed POL 352, SOC 352. 
Prerequisites: PSY 351 Statistics for Behavioral Sciences. 
 
PSY 354 Social Psychology (3) (Spring) 
Overview of how humans operate within a social context and the experimental research that contributes to an 
understanding of this phenomena. Emphasizes current research and methodology. Cross listed SOC 354. 
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 361 Play Therapy (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduces play therapy through contemporary theories, a study of the neurobiology of play, directive and non-
directive play, child psychopathology, and play interventions. Explores legal and ethical issues unique to play therapy, 
along with other play therapy topics.  
Prerequisite: PSY 300 Infant and Early Childhood Development or PSY 306 Middle Childhood and Adolescent 
Development 
 
PSY 362 Understanding Trauma and Developing Resiliency (2) (Fall) 
Surveys trauma theory and explores the neurobiology of trauma. Covers various forms of trauma, emphasizing 
developmental and complex trauma and their long-term effects on the individual. Examines differentiating between 
resiliency and post-traumatic growth and models for fostering resiliency. 
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
PSY 363 A Systems Approach to Helping Families (3) (Fall) 
An introduction to understanding and helping families by examining theoretical concepts and current research of 
family systems; individual, couple, and family behaviors; family of origin; family roles; and societal perspectives of 
diversity and cultural variance related to family dynamics.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 371 Organizational Behavior Management (3) (Odd Falls) 
The systematic study of the actions and attitudes that people exhibit in organizations. The course will be taught from 
an interdisciplinary perspective and will focus on topics such as motivation, productivity, decision-making, 
communication, and leadership. Cross listed BUS 371 and SOC 371.  
 
PSY 375 Psychology of Personality (3) (Odd Falls) 
An intensive study of the major theories of personality with a primary emphasis on application to the students’ 
personal experiences. Culminates with students formalizing their own theory of personality.  
Prerequisite: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology. 
 
PSY 380 Carol Lee Seminar (1)  
See SWK 380.  
 
PSY 385 Psychology Practicum (3) (Fall, Interim, Spring; by Application) 
Practical experience in the field of psychology. Placement opportunities include working with children, adolescents, 
and adults in a variety of settings, or in human resources, research, animal behavior, organizational behavior, or other 
areas of psychology. Students may review a list of possible sites located in the Greater Jackson Area, or they may 
request a site of special interest (i.e. out of area, out of state, international) to be approved by the practicum director. 
Students are encouraged to participate in an area related to personal career goals. In addition to hours completed at 
the practicum site, students are responsible for maintaining timely communication with SAU faculty supervisor and 
completing paperwork and other assignment. Students must complete a total minimum of 4 credit hours (160 hours 
at the practicum site). Only 1 credit may be taken during any given interim, with the remainder to be taken in a 
contiguous semester. Applications due to the department no later than March 1 for summer or fall semesters and 
November 1 for interim or spring semesters. See Practicum Handbook for more information on policy and procedures.  
Prerequisites: PSY 303 Psychology Seminar III and minimum of 18 earned credit hours in the major. 
 
PSY 403 Neuropsychology (4) (Fall) 
Examines the physiological basis of behavior with an emphasis on the organization and function of the central nervous 
system. Studies psychopathology, emotion, sleep, sexuality, and stress from an anatomical and physiological 
viewpoint. The biological basis is applicable to many fields including clinical, abnormal, developmental, behavioral, 
and health psychology. Recommended for students preparing for the advanced GRE in psychology. Lab included.  
Prerequisites: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology and junior standing. 
Corequisite: PSY 403L. 
 
PSY 422 Counseling Psychology (3) (Spring) 
A combination of various theories of counseling methodology and interviewing.  
Prerequisites: PSY 100 Introduction to Psychology, junior standing. 
 
PSY 450 Psychology Internship (1-12) (Fall, Spring) 
Must be approved by the department. Requires a minimum of 26 credit hours completed in the major. Specific 
readings, seminar requirements, and/or appropriate written assignments may be assigned by the instructor. 
Departmental guidelines for an internship may be obtained from the Psychology Department. Graded ""S"/"U." 
Application required.  
 
PSY 460 Senior Research Project (3-6) (Fall, Spring) 
Information and guidelines are available in the Psychology Department. Application required. 
 
PSY 490 Honors Thesis (3-6) (Fall, Spring; by Application) 
Provides an opportunity for students to do a significant project of scholarly productivity and/or research in the 

 
 

 
 
student’s major area of study. Ideally taken the semester directly following PSY 480 Thesis Prospectus.  
Prerequisite: PSY 480 Thesis Prospectus, senior standing, 3.5 major GPA, application 
 
PSY 498 Capstone: Integration and Preparation (2) (Fall) 
Designed to help psychology majors transition from undergraduate students to graduate school or a career in the field 
of psychology. Interactive seminar class focuses on the interface between the psychology field and Christianity. 
Emphasizes a review of psychological content, strong critical thinking skills, and dynamic communication skills. 
Students prepare a resume and portfolio and participate in mock job interviews. Explores graduate school application, 
admission interviews, and GRE information. Includes a comprehensive assessment of the field of psychology.   
Prerequisite: PSY 352 Research Design or permission. 
 
RDG (Reading) 
 
RDG 340 Emergent and Beginning Literacy (3) (Spring) 
See ECE 340.  
 
RDG 356 Culturally Responsive Pedagogy (3) (Odd Falls) 
Explores the theories and research in first and second language acquisition and reading, writing, listening, and 
speaking instruction of children with linguistic, cultural, ethnic, and racial differences. Students design a Family 
Literacy plan to enhance parent involvement and literacy development of all members of the family. Fieldwork 
includes interviews with learners at various stages of English language development, including a newly arrived 
immigrant student. Using information from those interviews, students develop appropriate instructional practices for 
teaching reading, listening, speaking, and writing for the interviewees. Students translate a newsletter into the native 
speaker’s language and have their translation critiqued by a speaker of that language. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "B-" or better in EDU 321 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades or EDU 
322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Intermediate Grades. 
 
RDG 361 Information Literacy (1) (Even Springs) 
Addresses specific aspects of information literacy related to the teaching of reading, including engaging elementary 
school students in media-rich environments while helping them to grasp essential content. Course experiences help 
teacher candidates evaluate and select materials to develop literacy and then create strategies for elementary 
students to access and use such materials. Students create three media-enhanced genre selections accessible to 
elementary students and design an assessment to determine student understanding. TE candidates pilot the works 
and assessments with an elementary student and report outcomes. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: SOE admission, EDU 360 Integrating Technology in Education (may be taken concurrently). 
 
RDG 377 Young Adult Literature (3) (Odd Springs) 
Provides broad exposure to quality classic, contemporary and multicultural young adult literature and non-fiction 
texts. Examines curricular and pedagogical issues salient to the adoption of contemporary text selections, such as 
identity, ethnicity, and gender. Students acquire sensitivity to the linguistic, historical, and cultural contexts for texts 
selected and identify key issues and reoccurring themes. Various instructional approaches will be explored, including 
reader response theory, comprehension strategies, and contemporary critical theories. Students will explore and 
develop strategies to enhance engagement and motivation in cross-curricular reading. Each TE candidate will develop 
and implement a lesson for a middle school student and determine appropriate modifications to the lesson based on 
feedback. "C" or better required for teacher education majors. Requires SOE admission. 
 
RDG 424 Elementary and Middle School Reading Problems (3) 
See EDU 424.  
 
RDG 426 Reading Interventions and Remediation (3) (Spring) 
Focuses on reading intervention strategies and remediation based on assessment and diagnosis of reading difficulties 
in oral language, fluency, reading comprehension, vocabulary, and spelling. Students develop a field-based case study 
of an elementary or middle school reader, identify strengths and weaknesses of various components of reading, plan 
and execute interventions, and evaluate the child’s response to intervention. Interventions include a balanced reading 
instruction approach and home-based connections based on the reader’s needs. Students communicate the results of 
 
 
 
 

  

 
the intervention response to the reader, family, and classroom teacher or specialist. Off-site case study required.  
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "B-" or better in EDU 424 Elementary and Middle School Reading Problems, and EDU 321 
Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades or EDU 322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in 
Intermediate Grades 
 
RDG 428 Teaching Writing for PK-6 Teachers (3) (Odd Falls) 
Candidates explore research in writing, review the developmental stages of writing, examine writing processes and 
instructional strategies, and evaluate commercial writing programs. Candidates participate in the writing process to 
better understand how writers write, to create model texts for use with students, and to contribute to a classroom 
anthology. Candidates will be on-site, supporting elementary students with writing. Candidates will demonstrate a 
variety of Pk-6 writing instructional strategies using various genres and mentor texts. Grade “C” or better required.  
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "B-" or better in EDU 321 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades or EDU 
322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Intermediate Grades. 
 
RDG 439 Issues and Trends in Literacy Education (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines contemporary models for literacy learning and reading and traces the history and influences on the teaching 
of reading and reading practices relative to current issues and trends. Explores the effect of policies at the national, 
state, and local levels on staff and program development, text selection, and interpretation of student assessment for 
reading and language arts. Field experiences include an interview with a literacy specialist of K-12 administrator, 
attendance at school board meeting, professional development participation, and investigation of a literacy grant 
opportunity in partnership with a local school. Preferably taken after reading coursework. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, "B-" or better in EDU 321 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Primary Grades or EDU 
322 Teaching Reading and Language Arts in Intermediate Grades. 
 
REC (Recreation) 
 
REC 161 Backpacking and Wilderness Experience (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for backpacking and wilderness experiences. Focuses on 
developing competency levels sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure 
setting.  
 
REC 162 Kayaking (1) (Fall) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for kayaking. Focuses on developing competency levels 
sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure setting.  
 
REC 163 High Ropes (1) (Even Springs) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for high ropes. Focuses on developing competency levels 
sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure setting.  
 
REC 164 Low Ropes (1) (Odd Springs) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for low ropes. Focuses on developing competency levels 
sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure setting.  
 
REC 165 Basic Rock Climbing (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for basic rock climbing. Focuses on developing competency 
levels sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure setting.  
 
REC 166 Bicycling (1) (Even Springs) 
Introduces students to knowledge, skills, and abilities for bicycling. Focuses on developing competency levels 
sufficient to teach, demonstrate, and lead the activity in a recreation and/or leisure setting.  
 
REC 171 Water Safety Instructor (2) (Limited) 
Covers a range of educational methods for conducting swimming and safety courses on various levels. Emphasizes 
waterfront set up for campus and recreational facilities. American Red Cross certification can be earned.  

 
 

 
 
REC 248 Lifeguard Training (2) (Limited) 
Covers the skills and knowledge necessary in preventing and/or responding to aquatic emergencies. Includes 
waterfront lifeguarding module. American Red Cross certification can be earned.  
Prerequisite: appropriate swimming skills. 
 
REC 335 Facilities Planning and Operations for Health, Fitness, Recreation and Sports (3) (Even Falls) 
Introduces planning, design, and operations processes in facility development. Covers an evaluation process required 
when planning, designing, and constructing facilities and establishing operations procedures. Cross listed HES 335. 
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. 
 
REC 401 Grant Writing (2) (Limited) 
Introduces grant writing, techniques used in the development of grant writing, and the funding and planning 
processes in developing grants in recreation and leisure areas and nonprofit organizations.  
 
REC 424 Liability and Risk Management in Recreation and Leisure (3) (Even Springs) 
Introduces legal issues related to risk and liability of operating recreation and leisure services. Covers protection of 
self and organizations from legal exposure by the identifying legal risks, evaluating risks, and implementing a risk 
management plan. 
Prerequisite: junior standing. 
 
REL (Religion) 
 
REL 231 Introduction to Apologetics (1) (Interim) 
Explores the purpose and practice of apologetics and traditional and recent answers to questions concerning Christian 
credenda, most particularly including God (existence, character), Jesus (life, divinity, resurrection) and the Bible 
(canon, textual criticism, veracity, authority). 
 
REL 322 Introduction to Free Methodism (2) (Limited) 
Examines the origin, organization, and doctrines of the Free Methodist Church. Open to any student but 
recommended for Free Methodist ministerial students.  
 
REL 343 History of Christianity (3) (Even Falls) 
Examines the era of the apostolic fathers, the councils, the church-state issues, scholasticism, the Reformation, and 
major leaders and movements of the modern era, including pietism, emergence of new theological patterns, social 
movements, and the missionary movement. Cross listed HIS 343. 
 
REL 346 History of Christianity in America (3) (Limited) 
Examines the origin and growth of Christianity in the U.S. from colonial times to the present. Cross listed HIS 346. 
 
REL 394 World Religions (3) (Online) 
Survey of the theories of the origin of religion. Comparative study of the history of the development and teachings of 
the leading religions of the modern world. Cross listed PHI 394.  
 
SDL (Student Development and Learning) 
 
SDL 100 Introduction to Academic Programs (1) (Fall) 
Introduces students to the academic programs at Spring Arbor University as they discern their career aspirations and 
options so they can pursue future opportunities that match their skills, talents, and interests, which align with their 
response to God’s calling on their lives. Utilizes a variety of inventories and assessments in order to guide students 
towards understanding themselves as well as occupational fields, trends and demands. 
 
SDL 110 Introduction to Leadership Development (1) (Spring) 
Explores various leadership concepts within the context of biblical servant leadership. Explores skills necessary to 
become an effective Christian Leader. Students have the opportunity to discover and develop their own skills/gift 
repertoire, and practice and apply course content through various SAU student leadership opportunities. 
 
 
 
 

  

 
SDL 120 Life/Work Planning (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Prepares students for success after graduation. Through various teaching methods, students will be guided through 
steps to pursuing work opportunities within a desired career field. Also provides insight into practical areas of life 
outside of work.  
 
SDL 200 Bridging the Gap: Dialogue across Difference—Criminal Justice Reform (3) (Interim) 
Cross campus exchange to practice dialogue skills across political, cultural, and experiential differences, with students 
from Oberlin College. Students will practice listening deeply, seeking to understand, hearing across lines of difference, 
and seeking common ground without attempting to change minds or compromising deeply held values. Offers tools to 
go beyond the headlines, create constructive tension, understand shared humanity, develop practices of effective 
communication, and solve pressing problems with those of different backgrounds and beliefs. Includes site visits with 
a broad range of criminal justice stakeholders in Michigan. Participants develop proposals for criminal justice reform, 
integrating bipartisan perspectives. 
 
SED (Special Education) 
 
SED 200 Foundations in Special Education (3) (Spring) 
Focuses on exceptional learners and special education in context. Candidates will acquire knowledge of educational 
policies, practices, and design of individualized programs. Emphasis will be placed on how to serve students under the 
federally defined categories of exceptionality, individuals with cultural and linguistic needs, and the importance of 
developing relationships with families. Introduces assistive technology and its implementation. Requires 5 clock hours 
of site-based clinical work in a classroom setting for students with learning disabilities. "C" or better is required. May 
take concurrently with EDU 140 Exploring Critical Skills for the Professional Educator. 
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. 
 
SED 209 Human Development for Exceptional Learners (3) (Odd Springs) 
Complements and extends EDU 230 Educational Psychology with special emphasis on the brain and language 
development of exceptional learners. Key topics include basic anatomy of the brain, critical steps involved in the 
brain’s acquisition and processing of information, and memory systems as well as the latest research on how the brain 
processes speech and learning. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: "C" or better in EDU 230 Educational Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development. 
 
SED 300 Curriculum Design and Strategic Interventions (3) (Fall) 
Trains candidates to specifically design instruction by modifying and enhancing core curriculum for students with 
learning disabilities. Candidates will acquire integrated, coherent learning strategies to help students with learning 
disabilities succeed in the classroom. Topics include differentiation of curriculum and instruction, climate for learning, 
and knowing and assessing the learner. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: "C" in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 
 
SED 305 Classroom Management and Behavior Strategies (3) (Even Springs) 
Provides a practical foundation in the principles of individual and group management structures. Introduces basic 
behavioral management concepts. Students will demonstrate their ability to develop, implement, and incorporate 
appropriate techniques. Emphasizes strategies in the areas of identification, prevention, and assessment. Candidates 
will identify and research techniques for attaining and maintaining appropriate academic and social behaviors for 
constructive, social participation and independent learning, and create a functional behavior assessment paired with 
an intervention plan. Requires 5 clock hours of site-based clinical work in a classroom setting with students with 
learning disabilities. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: "C" in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 
 
SED 340 Laws and Policies for Special Education (3) (Even Springs) 
Examines the history of special education laws, educational rights, related services, due process, student discipline, 
dispute resolution and Section 504 of the Americans with Disabilities Act and IDEA compliance. Candidates will learn 
to effectively communicate the needs and rights of persons with disabilities according to state and federal special 
education law. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: "C" in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 

 
 

 
 
SED 360 Technology for Special Education (3) (Odd Springs) 
Provides a hands-on introduction to assistive and instructional technology for all content areas. Introduces a 
framework for assessing exceptional learners’ abilities, environment, required tasks and assistive tools, which will be 
utilized by candidates to develop a plan for educational supports at various levels to increase student independence 
and classroom participation. Requires 5 clock hours of site-based clinical work in a classroom setting for students with 
learning disabilities. "C" is required. 
Prerequisites: "C" or better in each EDU 230 Educational Psychology, SED 209 Human Development for Exceptional 
Learners, and SED 300 Curriculum Design and Strategic Interventions. 
 
SED 385 Practicum with Special Needs Population (2) (Limited) 
Students work with individuals with special needs related to the SAU student’s field of study by participating in a 
practicum site to hone skills in the major/minor. Requires 40 clock hours per credit hour in a professional placement 
under direction of a work supervisor and an academic supervisor. Graded "S"/"U." 
Prerequisite: "C" or better in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 
 
SED 420 Elementary Special Education Methods (3) (Fall) 
Site-based methods course with hands-on experience in content, instruction, and strategies to enable candidates to 
meet the needs of elementary-level students with learning disabilities. Emphasizes intensive interventions for reading, 
mathematics, written expression, social studies, STE(A)M, and the arts as incorporated into the creation and teaching 
of an elementary thematic unit plan. Candidates practice classroom management, positive behavior supports, and 
cooperative learning techniques. Requires 20 clock hours of site-based methods work in a classroom setting for 
students with learning disabilities. "B-" or better is required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, Basic Skills Exam, SED 423 Special Education Assessment and EDU 230 Educational 
Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development, and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
SED 421 Secondary Special Education Methods (3) (Spring) 
Site-based methods course with hands-on experience with content, instruction, and strategies to enable candidates to 
meet the needs of students with learning disabilities at the middle and secondary levels. Emphasizes intensive 
interventions for math, reading, written expression, social studies, science, and the arts as incorporated into the 
creation and teaching of a secondary level thematic unit plan. Candidates practice Universal Design for Learning, 
inclusion and co-teaching. Requires 20 clock hours of site-based methods work in a classroom setting for students 
with learning disabilities. "B-" or better is required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, Basic Skills Exam, SED 423 Special Education Assessment, EDU 230 Educational 
Psychology or ECE 266 Early Child Growth and Development, and EDU 267 Early Adolescent Development. 
 
SED 423 Special Education Assessment (3) (Fall) 
Provides instruction in appropriate assessment methods that lead directly to diagnosing skill deficits and determining 
levels of functioning in reading, writing, mathematical and social skills. Assessment results are translated into goals, 
objectives, and statements of progress on student IEPs. Explores methods of evaluating instructional outcomes for 
adjustments to ongoing instructional planning to meet individual needs. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: "C" or better in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 
 
SED 426 Professional Practice and Collaboration (3) (Spring) 
Candidates focus on the collaborative partnerships essential to working with students with mild/moderate disabilities 
and their families. Encompasses collaboration between general and special education teachers, teaching assistants, 
families, educational professionals, and agencies. Includes interpersonal skills and the building blocks and strategies 
needed to effectively communicate and work with key collaborators. Covers cooperative teaching, IEP team 
participation, supervising support staff, and facilitating transition needs. "C" or better is required. 
Prerequisite: "C" or better in SED 200 Foundations in Special Education. 
 
SED 430 Internship Seminar (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Focuses on topics specific to the special education field, such as the professional role, work environment, classroom 
space, teaching and testing, collaborating with families, professional organizations and supports, functional behavior 
assessment, intervention, and thriving as a special educator. Interns who are candidates for the special education 
endorsement in learning disabilities meet as a group during their special education internship. Capstone project is a 
 
 
 
 

  

 
professional portfolio of the internship experience. "B-" required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, completion of all SED coursework, and approved to student teach. 
Corequisite: SED 450 Internship Site-based Experience. 
 
SED 450 Internship Site-based Experience (Fall, Spring) 
Provides observation, assessment, instructional and management opportunities in the special education classroom 
under the mentorship of a classroom teacher and University supervisor. The intern assumes increasing responsibility 
for directing the classroom. In addition to the elementary or secondary internship experience in a general education 
classroom, candidates complete a special education internship of either 10 weeks in an elementary special education 
classroom or 15 weeks in a secondary special education classroom. Requires at least 180 hours and 8 weeks of site-
based internship work in a classroom setting for students with learning disabilities. Graded "S"/"U." 
Prerequisites: SOE admission; completion of all required EDU courses, SED courses and the pre-student teaching 
experience; approved to student teach. 
Corequisite: SED 430 Internship Seminar. 
 
SED 452 Internship Site-based Experience II (Fall, Spring) 
Provides additional opportunities in the special education classroom for candidates who need more experience in the 
development of classroom techniques, as determined by their University supervisor and mentor teacher. The number 
of credits are determined based on the number of weeks required for placement per student teacher policy. 
Prerequisite: SED 450 Internship Site-based Experience. 
 
SOC (Sociology) 
 
SOC 100 Modern Social Problems (3) (Fall, Spring) 
A study of modern social problems such as poverty, racism, sexism, the rich and powerful, and possible solutions to 
social problems and secular and Christian theories. 
 
SOC 101 Introduction to Sociology (3) (Fall, Spring, Online) 
Introduces concepts, theories, and methods of analyzing society, culture, social institutions, organizations, groups, 
classes, races, and ethnic groups.  
 
SOC 201 Crime, Corrections, and Criminal Justice (3) 
See CRJ 201.  
 
SOC 242 Death, Grief, and Loss (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines grief and loss as experienced in various human settings – nursing homes, hospitals, and private homes, or 
through death or divorce – from various viewpoints (e.g., doctor, chaplain, E.R. nurse, the bereaved, etc.). Cross listed 
PSY 242 and SWK 242. 
 
SOC 246 Substance Abuse and Society (3) (Even Springs, Online) 
Addresses the issues of alcohol and drug abuse in contemporary society from a historical perspective and provides 
students with information that they can use to bring a Christian solution to the problem of substance abuse in their 
lives and the lives of those they meet personally and professionally. Cross listed PSY 246 and SWK 246.  
 
SOC 250 Marriage and Family (3) (Fall) 
Examines the institution of marriage and the family with emphasis on the changes in their structures and family roles. 
Traces the family through the life-cycle and analyzes its interaction with social class, ethnic, race, and other variations. 
Explores issues of intimacy, communication and conflict that face contemporary families. Cross listed SWK 250. 
 
SOC 282 Introduction to International Development (3) (Odd Falls) 
Introduces the history of international development, the realities of contemporary life in the world’s low-income 
countries, and the competing theoretical perspectives on development and social change. Addresses cultural, social, 
political, religious, economic, and environmental elements of people’s lives in the developing world. Surveys and 
critiques such dominant perspectives on development as modernization, dependency, world systems, globalization, 
and sustainable development.  
 

 
 

 
 
SOC 300 Urban Sociology (3) (Limited) 
Introduces theories of urbanization, urban development, and urban change with a historical and international 
emphasis. Special emphasis on contemporary issues and theories of urban society in the U. S. Topics include public 
housing, crime and urbanization, ethnic transition, and community development.  
 
SOC 301 Criminological Theory (3) 
See CRJ 301. 
 
SOC 311 Racial and Ethnic Relations (3) (Fall, Sites, Online) 
Examines cultures and experiences of minority ethnic groups in the U.S., and the impact of prejudice, discrimination, 
and racism on these minority groups and on white society. Cross listed SWK 311. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
 
SOC 314 Cultural Anthropology (3) (Limited) 
Examines cross cultural sociological and anthropological perspectives on human behavior and social institutions as 
well as social and cultural similarities and differences among human populations.  
 
SOC 327 Social Stratification (3) (Spring) 
Addressed issues of social class, social status, and social power from historical and cross cultural perspectives. 
Students are encouraged to confront a variety of theories for the purpose of evaluating their fit with Christian faith.  
 
SOC 351 Statistics for Behavioral Sciences (3) (Fall) 
See PSY 351. 
 
SOC 352 Research Design in Behavioral Sciences (3) (Spring) 
See PSY 352. 
 
SOC 354 Social Psychology (3) 
See PSY 354.  
 
SOC 360 Gender and Society (3) (Spring) 
Explores how gender and gender roles impact on participation in major social institutions such as family, church, work, 
politics, and education. Impact of gender-role socialization across the life-span will be explored. Cross listed SWK 360.  
 
SOC 371 Organizational Behavior Management (3) 
See PSY 371.  
 
SOC 382 International Human Rights (3) (Odd Springs) 
Explores rights, freedoms, and protections essential to humanity on a global scale and the holistic biblical concept of 
justice and its presence or absence in countries around the world. Examines problems of the unequal distribution of 
wealth, power, and natural resources in the context of international organizations, nations, and people. Examines 
international organizations, multilateral and bilateral treaties, and country reports/histories. Analyzes conflicts such as 
the Congo, Nazi Germany, Cambodia, Bosnia, Kosovo, Rwanda, Chechnya, the Sudan, etc. Human rights issues 
discussed include sex trafficking, forced prostitution, bonded slavery, domestic/sexual abuse, the HIV/AIDS crisis, 
genocide, ethnic cleansing, systematic rape, all from a global perspective. Cross listed HIS 382 and SWK 382.  
 
SOC 452 Sociological Theory (3) (Even Springs) 
Briefly explores the socio-historical contexts and events that gave rise to the development of sociology as an academic 
discipline based on the scientific method. Examines and critically analyzes selected ideas of key sociologists from the 
classical era (e.g., Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Comte, Simmel, Cooley, and Mead) as well as contemporary theory and 
the various paradigms that are influential in sociological theory today.  
Prerequisites: SOC 101 Introduction to Sociology and junior standing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
SOC 480 Senior Seminar (1) (Fall) 
Seminar course. Covers advanced studies in selected sociological, criminological, and global topics related to 
contemporary, historical, technological, and social issues. Lectures, student presentations, and discussion will aid in 
further developing inquiry techniques and critical thinking skills. Students are encouraged to prepare graduate school 
and/or employment applications for life after graduation. 
Prerequisite: senior standing. 
 
SOC 484 Spirituality, Faith, and Justice (3) (Fall) 
Capstone course focusing on integration of Christian faith, principles of spiritual formation, and basic principles of 
social analysis and planned change. Emphasizes the implications of the Christian faith on the understanding of social 
justice and the implications of sociological thought for praxis and planned change. Cross listed POL 484, SWK 484. 
 
SPA (Spanish) 
 
SPA 101 Elementary Spanish I (3) (Fall) 
Offers training in the elements of grammar and pronunciation with emphases on the development of speaking, 
listening, reading, and writing skills taught in a cross cultural context designed to promote awareness and appreciation 
of Hispanic cultures. Does not count toward the Spanish major or minor requirements. 
 
SPA 102 Elementary Spanish II (3) (Spring) 
Continuation of SPA 101. Does not count toward the Spanish major or minor requirements.  
Prerequisite: SPA 101 Elementary Spanish I. 
 
SPA 201 Intermediate Spanish I (3) (Fall) 
Review and thorough studies of grammar and communication skills with extensive practice in conversation, reading 
and composition taught in a cross cultural context designed to promote awareness and appreciation of Hispanic 
cultures. Does not count toward the Spanish major or minor requirements. 
Prerequisite: SPA 102 Elementary Spanish II. 
 
SPA 202 Intermediate Spanish II (3) (Spring) 
Continuation of SPA 201. Does not count toward the Spanish major or minor requirements. 
Prerequisite: SPA 201 Intermediate Spanish I. 
 
SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Gateway to study in advanced courses in the major or minor. Central concepts include developing advanced reading 
and critical writing skills, higher level grammatical forms, presentation skills, and the ability to critique within the 
cultural and literary contexts.  
Prerequisite: SPA 202 Intermediate Spanish II or approval by the Department of World Languages chair. 
 
SPA 321 Advanced Spanish (3) (Even Springs) 
Advanced grammar and composition practice including expository writing based on research and analysis. 
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 322 Conversation and Phonetics (3) (Even Falls) 
Intensive practice in speaking Spanish, with oral presentations, discussions, and listening assignments. Includes a 
linguistic study of Spanish, with emphasis on phonetics.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 323 Civilization and Culture of Spain (3) (Odd Falls) 
A study of the history, culture, and geography of Spain with emphasis on major political, philosophical, social and 
artistic movements.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 324 Latin American Civilization and Culture (3) (Even Falls) 
A study of the history, culture, and geography of Mexico, Central and South America with emphasis on major political, 

 
 

 
 
philosophical, social and artistic movements.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 325 Survey of Literature of Spain (3) (Even Springs) 
A study of selected literary works from the Middle Ages to the 20th Century.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 326 Survey of Latin American Literature (3) (Odd Springs) 
A study of selected literary works from Mexico, Central America, and South America from pre-Colombian period 
through the 20th Century. 
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPA 410 Seminar in Literature (2-3) (Limited) 
A study of a particular period or genre of literature written in Spanish.  
Prerequisite: "B-" or better in SPA 306 Introduction to Spanish Literature and Culture. 
 
SPE (Speech) 
 
SPE 100 Oral Communication (2) (Fall, Interim, Spring) 
Focuses on small group and public communication. Activities include informal and formal speaking. Does not count 
toward speech major.  
 
SPE 212 Fundamentals of Speech (3) (Online) 
Theory, organization, preparation, and practice of speechmaking. Required speeches: storytelling, inspirational, 
informative, persuasive and symposium-panel-forum. 
 
SPE 242 Story Telling (3) (Even Springs) 
Study and application of the history, theory, practice, and ethics of storytelling. Main focus is on developing 
storytelling skills and understanding narrative paradigms. Assignments include study and performance of personal and 
others’ stories and attending the Jackson Storyfest.  
 
SPE 265 Acting Techniques (3) (Fall)   
Creative methods of role development for theater. Includes play analysis. 
 
SPE 342 Oral Interpretation and Voice (3) (Even Springs) 
Analysis, practice, and oral reading of prose, poetry, and other forms of writing. Study and application of sounds for 
improved vocal quality and clear enunciation in public speaking. Requires preparing and presenting a program of 
literature.  
 
SPE 460 Recital (1) (Fall, Spring) 
Students prepare and perform a developed speech. 
 
SST (Social Studies) 
 
SST 200 Human Society: Learning in the Social Studies (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Explores the ways in which social studies disciplines systematically approach the interaction of human beings within 
the social forms they have created. Introduces concepts and techniques common to history, geography, politics, and 
economics to help students grasp and communicate the fundamental dynamics of human society. Emphasizes 
practical exercises in recognizing structures and processes, organizing and analyzing data, and drawing conclusions to 
enlarge students’ skills as classroom communicators and as critical participants in the world.  "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: sophomore standing and must be certifying to teach elementary. 
 
SST 300 Teaching Social Studies Standards (3) (Limited) 
Prepares candidates to teach social studies content directly aligned with the revised Michigan Social Studies Standards 
(C3 framework), including grade-level content expectations (GLCE) and high school content expectations (HSCE).  
 
 
 
 

  

 
SWK (Social Work) 
 
SWK 242 Death, Grief and Loss (3) 
See SOC 242. 
 
SWK 246 Substance Abuse and Society (3) 
See SOC 246. 
 
SWK 250 Marriage and Family (3) 
See SOC 250. 
 
SWK 281 Introduction to Social Work (3) (Fall, Video Conference, Online) 
Introduces the field of social work. Explores various practice settings, the history of social work, and the purposes and 
values that guide social work practice with individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities to promote 
social justice and social welfare. Students are encouraged to assess their potential as a social worker. "C+" or better 
for social work majors. 
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. 
 
SWK 305 Human Behavior in the Social Environment (3) (Fall, Video Conference, Online) 
Overviews biological, psychological, and social development of individuals from a life-span and family life-cycle 
perspective. Emphasizes how the interaction of the individual, culture, race, gender, and the social environment affect 
human behavior using social systems theory. Addresses issues of gender and other current social problems associated 
with the family life-cycle. Provides the theoretical foundation for social work practice with individuals, families, 
groups, organizations, and communities. Strongly recommended prerequisites of BIO 101 Human Biology, PSY 100 
Introduction to Psychology, SOC 101 Introduction to Sociology, and SWK 281 Introduction to Social Work or equivalent 
courses for adequate preparation for success in this course.  Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
 
SWK 307 Child Welfare (3) (Online) 
Includes concepts, policies, and practices in the broad field of family and child services. Explores traditional child 
welfare services and current concentrations or specializations defined as "services to families, children, and youth." 
Introduces policies and services that impact children and families and services available for children and families who 
are experiencing problems. "C" or better required for certificate. 
 
SWK 308 Adulthood and Aging (3) (Limited) 
Explores human development from age 40 through death. Explores research on developmental issues such as the 
changing family, work and retirement, faith, leisure, biological changes, and health. Covers developmental tasks and 
personality characteristics that lead to successful aging. Analyzes social policies that impact the ability to meet 
personal needs. Explores how the Baby Boomers are and will be changing definitions of aging.  
 
SWK 311 Racial and Ethnic Relations (3) (Fall, Video Conference, Online) 
See SOC 311.  
 
SWK 322 Volunteer Administration: Managing the Work of an Unpaid Work Team (2) (Limited) 
Explores theoretical concepts from sociology, social work, business, history, communications, theology, motivation, 
and education as they engage in what constitutes volunteer administration. Interactive exercises explore such topics 
as who is volunteering in the U.S. today, the impact of age on volunteer behavior, the history of formalized 
volunteering, the influence of religion on voluntary behavior, etc. Reviews elements essential to the effective 
organization and management of a successful volunteer program.  
 
SWK 335 Interviewing (3) (Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
Introduces the researched-based theory and techniques of interviewing for the helping relationship. A pre-practice 
course that will teach interviewing skills necessary for effective practice with individuals, families, groups, 
organizations, and communities. May be taken concurrent with SWK 340 Practice with Individuals and Families. 
Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisite: SWK 305 Human Behavior in the Social Environment, or permission. 
 

 
 

 
 
SWK 340 Practice with Individuals and Families (3) (Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
Covers theoretical foundations of generalist social work practice with individuals and families. Theories of Human 
Behavior and Social Environment (HBSE) will be applied to practice of assessment, goal-setting, intervention, 
termination and practice evaluation. Special attention given to intervention with diverse and vulnerable populations. 
Problem-solving process is learned that will also be applied to practice with groups, organizations, and communities. 
May be taken concurrently with SWK 335 Interviewing. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisite: SWK 305 Human Behavior in the Social Environment, or permission. 
 
SWK 341 Trauma Informed Child Welfare (3) (Online) 
Provides future child welfare practitioners with foundational knowledge related to trauma and child traumatic stress. 
Focuses on utilizing a "trauma lens" to examine practice with children and families within the child welfare system and 
the role of the social worker in effectively identifying traumatic stress, responding to children and families in a 
trauma-informed manner, and ensuring that they receive trauma-specific treatment services. 
 
SWK 351 Statistics for Behavioral Sciences (3) 
See PSY 351. 
 
SWK 352 Research Design (3) (Fall, Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
Basic theory of research design is used for a proposal for program outcome evaluation, needs assessment, and single 
subject research. Covers design and analysis of quantitative research with introduction to qualitative research 
methods. Prepares students for reading and using professional research articles. Provides a foundation for 
understanding how research methods can be used to evaluate practice at a micro- and macro-level. It is advisable for 
students to complete SWK 351 Statistics or equivalent prior to taking this course. It is the student’s responsibility to be 
equipped with prerequisite knowledge required for course success. "C" or better for social work majors. 
 
SWK 360 Gender and Society (3)  
See SOC 360. 
 
SWK 380 Carol Lee Seminar (1) (Odd Springs) 
The Carol Lee Seminar is a day-long meeting that focuses on some aspect of death, grief, and loss, utilizing the 
expertise of a guest speaker. Independent reading and writing will also be required allowing the student to further 
explore an aspect of death, grief, or loss. Cross listed PSY 380.  
 
SWK 382 International Human Rights (3) 
See SOC 382.  
 
SWK 442 Social Welfare Policies (3) (Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
Reviews the historical development and philosophical basis of social work’s response to those in need and of social 
welfare policy. Examines the current welfare system to enable students to develop beginning practice skills in the 
construction, analysis, and implementation of social welfare policy at local, state, and national levels. Prepares 
students to effectively utilize social policy as a generalist social worker. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisites: SWK 281 Introduction to Social Work, POL 213 American National Government or POL 214 State and 
Local Government, and an introductory, microeconomics or macroeconomics course. 
 
SWK 446 Practice with Groups (3) (Fall, Video Conference, Online) 
Examines theories of group behavior and the impact of group participation on human behavior with emphasis on how 
these theories can be applied to problem-solving methods for treatment and task groups. Systems theory is used to 
understand how the social work profession makes use of groups to accomplish individual, family, organizational 
and/or community goals. Covers issues of diversity within and between various groups in our society as well as group 
dynamics, group development, group decision-making, use of self within group dynamics, group leadership skills, and 
evaluation of group practice. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisites: SWK 335 Interviewing and SWK 340 Practice with Individuals and Families. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
SWK 447 Practice with Communities and Organizations (3) (Fall, Video Conference, Online) 
Builds on the theory of human behavior in the social environment from SWK 305 and SWK 446 by providing additional 
theory of community and organizational behavior. Focuses on a macro-perspective involving work with and in the 
community. Discusses how social work uses knowledge, values, skills, and affective reasoning in organizing and 
planning to change or reform social conditions and to achieve better organization and coordination of community 
systems for meeting human needs. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisites: SWK 305 Human Behavior in the Social Environment, SWK 335 Interviewing, and SWK 340 Practice with 
Individuals and Families. 
 
SWK 450 Internship (10) (Fall, Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
Participation in social service program in a community agency under the direction of social work professionals and 
University faculty. Students advance their knowledge of the profession and refine their generalist practice skills. 
Involves 400 clock hours of agency work. Graded "S"/"U."  
Prerequisites: Admission to the SWK major and successful completion of the field practice application. 
Corequisite: SWK 480 Internship Seminar. 
 
SWK 480 Internship Seminar (2) (Spring, Video Conference, Online) 
A capstone course. Integrates concepts, knowledge, values, skills, and cognitive and affective processes from previous 
coursework with agency experience. Provides opportunities to share learning experiences from agency placement and 
to demonstrate competencies through a series of integration assignments. Minimum "C" for social work majors. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the SWK major and successful completion of the field practice application process. 
 
SWK 484 Spirituality, Faith, and Justice (3) 
See SOC 484. 
 
THE (Theology) 
 
THE 205 History of Christian Thought (3) (Limited) 
Surveys key theological developments, doctrines, figures, and ideas that shaped Christian thought from the early 
Christian church to today. Examines the relevance of historic Christian doctrine for personal life and ministry practice.  
 
THE 206 Doctrines of the Christian Faith (3) (Odd Falls) 
Introduces basic and essential Christian doctrine. Explores the nature, task, and sources of theology, disputed issues 
within evangelical theology, a major contemporary issue (open view theism), and theological roots of various 
traditions. Covers major theological figures, terms, traditions, and periods of the historic Christian faith. 
 
THE 307 The Holy Spirit, Spiritual Gifts, and Spirit Movements (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines biblical, theological, and practical aspects and various related controversial issues of the person and work of 
the Holy Spirit (pneumatology), of spiritual gifts, and of Spirit-movements. Emphasizes the role of the Holy Spirit and 
spiritual gifts in the life of the believer and the church. 
 
THE 318 Christian Origins: Heretics and Saints (3) (Odd Falls) 
Explores seminal contributions of Christian theologians of the first five centuries of the church. Emphasizes patristic 
biblical interpretation through study of select writings pivotal for doctrinal formulation in the areas of Christology, 
Trinitarian theology, ecclesiology, and soteriology. Critically examines various exemplars (such as Irenaeus and 
Augustine) in light of contemporary ecclesial and cultural contexts and concerns.  
Prerequisites: PHI 200 Introduction to Philosophy and THE 206 Doctrines of the Christian Faith, or permission. 
 
THE 320 Luther, Calvin, and the European Reformations (3) (Limited) 
Introduces the background, major figures, and significant theological issues of the Reformation period in the 16th 
century that gave rise to Protestantism. Reviews writings of Martin Luther, John Calvin, and other reformers. Traces 
theological developments throughout the Lutheran, Calvinist, Radical, English, and Counter-Reformation movements. 
Discusses key theological issues particular to the Reformation period: sola scriptura, justification by grace, the nature 
of the sacraments, the understanding of the church, etc.  
Prerequisite: THE 206 Doctrines of the Christian Faith or instructor’s permission. 
 

 
 

 
 
THE 405 The Problem of Evil (3) (Even Falls) 
Examines the biblical, theological, philosophical, and personal problem of suffering and evil; the doctrines of God, 
creation, and providence; and the nature, origin, and challenge of sin, evil, and Satan. Discusses age-old questions and 
explores various responses to suffering and evil for personal life and the practice of ministry.  
 
THE 411 From Modern to Postmodern Theology (3) (Limited) 
Advanced seminar course. Covers the challenges to traditional theology in the Enlightenment period in the 18th 
Century. Examines various responses to modernism from the 19th to the 21st centuries, beginning with Classic Liberal 
Theology, Fundamentalism, Mediating Theologies, Neo-Orthodox Theologies, Neo-Liberal Theologies, Bonhoeffer and 
Radical Thought, and Evangelical Theology, and concluding with the Postmodern revolt against Modernity. A basic 
prerequisite knowledge of philosophy and theology will benefit the students in this class. 
Prerequisite: THE 206 Doctrines of the Christian Faith. 
 
THE 470 Development of Wesleyan Thought (3) (Limited) 
Explores Wesley’s roots in the Reformation, Wesley’s cultural and intellectual heritage, Wesley’s theology, and the 
development of Wesleyan thought from Wesley to the present. 
Prerequisite: THE 206 Doctrines of the Christian Faith or instructor’s permission. 
 
TSL (Teaching English as a Second Language) 
 
TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication (4) (Even Springs) 
Students explore personal biases and basic principles underlying multicultural communication competence. Provides 
an opportunity to develop cross cultural communication competence and activities for use in culturally diverse 
classrooms. Requires 15 hours in a K-12 ESL classroom or community ESL program. "C" or better required. 
 
TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of English Language Learners (2) (Odd Falls) 
Examines English linguistics for those preparing to teach English to non-native speakers of English. Compares different 
theories of language development and how grammar, reading, writing, and spelling instruction fit into current 
practices of language teaching. "C" or better required. 
 
TSL 326 Methods and Materials for Teachers of English Language Learners (4) (Odd Springs) 
Focuses on the pedagogical aspects of teaching English and the preparation of teaching materials for classroom use. 
Explores integrated methods and strategies for teaching listening, speaking, reading, and writing to ELLs of diverse 
backgrounds and levels. Requires highly constructive class participation and responsible out-of-class lesson 
assignment preparation for the practicum. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication or TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of ELL. 
 
TSL 327 Teaching Grammar for English Language Learners (2) (Even Falls Online) 
Enhances the classroom instruction for teachers of beginning and intermediate English Language Learners by blending 
classroom strategies with the study of the most important grammatical structures of English for speaking and writing. 
Students develop metalanguage skills for describing grammar correction. Students study different language groups in 
order to understand the most frequent error types for these languages. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication or TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of ELL. 
 
TSL 411 Sheltered Immersion (SIOP) for Content Area Teachers (4) (Even Springs Online) 
Uses Sheltered Immersion Observation Protocol (SIOP) training materials and theory to develop an understanding of 
how to plan a supportive classroom learning environment for ELL students in general and content classrooms. 
Candidates plan for multi-levels of diverse students using standards-based ESL and content curriculum. Candidates 
design integrated activities through thematic and inquiry-based units that focus on listening, speaking, reading, and 
writing goals for content area objectives and English language development. Requires a one-hour-a-week lab in 
science, social studies, or math classroom with ELLs. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication or TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of ELL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
TSL 420 Assessment and Evaluation of English Language Learners and Programs (3) (Odd Springs Online) 
Explores theoretical and practical aspects of language assessment and evaluation, particularly in measuring second 
language skills of students in ESL programs. "C" or better required. 
Prerequisite: TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication or TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of ELL. 
 
TSL 421 Methods for Teaching Literacy for English Language Learners (4) (Odd Falls Online) 
Focuses on teaching methods and classroom organization ideas for promoting oral language, vocabulary, reading 
comprehension, writing, and spelling for pre-K-12 ELLs. Candidates practice methods for developing reading 
comprehension, writing, and spelling for students at different levels of language proficiency. Requires 10 clock hours 
or field experience of in a K-12 ESL classroom. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisite: TSL 311 Cross Cultural Communication or TSL 321 Essential Linguistics for Teachers of ELL. 
 
TSL 430 Seminar in Teaching English as a Second Language (1) (Fall and Spring Online) 
Focuses on topics specific to the TSL field. "B-" or better required. 
Prerequisites: SOE admission, completion of all TSL coursework, and approved by SOE to student teach. 
 
VID (Video Production) 
 
VID 202 Video Production (4) (Spring) 
Explores principles of visual storytelling through TV studio and digital field production. Introduces TV studio 
operations, control room, and field equipment. Individual and group production of studio and field video projects.  
 
VID 306 Advanced Video Production (4) (Fall) 
Concentrated instruction and enriched experience in TV studio and field video production. Introduces producing and 
directing. Involves individual and group production of studio and field video projects. 
Prerequisite: VID 202 Video Production. 
 
VID 314 Script Writing (3) (Odd Falls) 
Promotes respect for and commitment to the processes necessary for effective playwriting and screenwriting. 
Explores regimens leading to greater creative output and the internally motivated disciplines contributing to artistic 
productivity. Cross listed ENG 314. 
 
VID 315 Design Tools: Premiere Pro (1) (Interim) 
Students edit video using the tools of Adobe Premiere Pro. Must have access to Adobe Premiere Pro software. 
 
VID 324 Introduction to Film (3) (Odd Springs) 
Examines vocabulary, methods, and principles of film by focusing on the systems of meaning that make film the 
sophisticated art form it is. Topics include visual design (including composition, color, and lighting), editing, 
cinematography, narrative structure, acting, sound, and music as separate systems of meaning that derive new 
meanings and use new methods when combined in film art. 
 
VID 334 Film Theory and History (3) (Limited) 
Exposes students to film as an art form. Emphasizes theoretical perspectives as a means of understanding film as a 
sophisticated synthesis of different forms of art. Topics include the historical development of artistry in film, basic 
elements of film as different systems of meaning, various approaches to analyzing film components, significant 
movements in the history of film, and various theoretical perspectives on film as an art form.  
 
VID 372 Short Film Production (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Focuses on the pre-production, production, post-production, and distribution processes of making independent films. 
Students fulfill various roles as director, producer, cinematographer, editor, production assistants, and writers. A 
different role may be assumed each semester repeated. New films are produced each semester. Can be repeated. 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
VID 376 Editing (3) (Even Falls) 
Students work with the tools used by film and video editors as they apply to the practice of visual storytelling. 
Explores best practices for working in a digital environment. Examines standard video editing theories and techniques.  
Prerequisite: COM 110 Communication Technology. 
 
VID 401 Film History (3) (Limited) 
In-depth critical research and analysis of list of important films from the past century. Examines schools of critical 
discourse in film and their place in the development of film as technical phenomenon, art form, and cultural medium.  
Prerequisite: VID 324 Introduction to Film. 
 
VID 410 TV Producing and Directing (2) (Spring) 
Students produce and direct television programs or films. May be repeated one time.  
Prerequisites: VID 306 Advanced Video Production. 
 
WRT (Writing) 
 
WRT 216 Writing for the Media (3) (Fall, Spring) 
Students develop a portfolio with various forms of writing for electronic and print delivery, including brochure and 
website copy, scripts for audio and video production, and others.  
 
WRT 306 Writing for Children (3) (Online) 
Reviews skills and techniques for writing fiction and nonfiction for children. Publication strategies and current markets 
will also be reviewed. Students prepare a portfolio and submit articles for publication.  
 
WRT 310 Multimedia Reporting (3) (Even Falls) 
Explores the changing concepts of news and the impact of media convergence and practice collecting information and 
constructing stories for radio, television, web, and social media platforms. Requires off-campus reporting experiences.  
 
WRT 316 Copy Editing (3) (Limited) 
Emphasizes mastery of a craft and principles of editing copy for various media. Includes headline writing and layout.  
 
WRT 324 Photojournalism (3) (Limited) 
Covers the relationship of photography to journalism, including basic visual communication theory, photographic 
design and technical skills. Assignments allow opportunity to tell a story, to set a mood, and to catch the high point of 
an event. Students develop a portfolio of photographic work. 
Prerequisite: ART 205 Foundations of Photography or permission. 
 
WRT 373 Feature Writing (3) (Spring Online) 
Covers steps involved in writing for magazine and book publication from the time the idea is conceived until the 
manuscript is accepted for publication. Explores freelance opportunities.  
Prerequisite: ENG 104 College Writing. 
