BI 270 Interpreting the Christian Scriptures. A study of 
the resources, principles, and methods of interpreting 
Scripture. (3) 
BI 393 Second Temple Judaism. A study of the history 
and literature of the Intertestamental Period with 
particular emphasis given to connections between the 
Old and New Testaments as well as to developments 
which aid in the understanding of the writings of the 
New Testament. Students will be familiarized with 
political, social, and cultural issues related to 
understanding this historical period through the use of 
primary and secondary readings and through a focused 
and guided research project. (3)  
BI 399 Special Issues in Bible. Directed study in Bible for 
the student who desires to pursue a topic of study not 
covered in the regular curriculum. Juniors and seniors 
only. (1-3) 
BI 400 Orientation to Internship. An introduction to 
and preparation for the internship experience and life-
related skills for all juniors two semesters prior to the 
planned internship. (0) 
BI 401 Internship in Biblical Studies. A senior level 
supervised internship experience with an approved 
mentor in an approved setting, within the student’s 
degree program or focus, evaluated according to the 
requirements in individually written learning 
covenants. Internship can range from 1-6 hours and 
may be repeated for a maximum of 6 hours. 
Prerequisite: BI 400 Orientation to Internship. (1-6) 
BI 413 Senior Seminar in Bible. A senior course 
designed to draw together the various courses and 
experiences that students have had which relate to 
Bible study and preparation to communicate the 
biblical truth. Prerequisite: Senior standing (3) 
BI 417 Text and Canon of the Bible. An examination of 
the historical, theological, and textual factors involved 
in the development of the Biblical canon, covering 
both what became the Old and New Testaments and 
what did not. (3) 
BI 427 Advanced Hermeneutics. A course designed to 
investigate the thought and methods underlying 
contemporary approaches to interpreting the Bible 
with a view to preaching and teaching with excellence 
in various settings. (3) 
BI 501 Introduction to God’s Word. A course designed 
for entering seminarians with little or no undergraduate 
work in biblical studies. The course looks at the message 
of the Bible as it is developed in the various parts of the 
Old and New Testaments is explored. (3) 
BI 603 Preaching and Teaching the Old Testament. A 
course designed to give students a basic understanding of 
principles and methodology for interpreting and 
proclaiming the message of the Old Testament. (3) 
BI 604 Preaching and Teaching the New Testament. A 
course designed to give students a basic understanding 
of principles and methodology for interpreting and 
proclaiming the message of the Old Testament. (3) 
BI 606 Introduction to Critical Biblical Methods and 
Writing for Research. An introduction to the methods 
of biblical criticism and their application for 
interpreting the Bible today. Students will practice 
skills for biblical interpretation through a guided 
research project designed to accomplish two goals. 
First, students will learn how to interpret the Bible in 
its literary, historical, rhetorical, and theological 
contexts. Second, students will articulate the enduring 
significances of a text for contemporary Christians. (3) 
BI 700 History of Biblical Interpretation and Theological 
Hermeneutics. An overview of the history of biblical 
interpretation as a guide to contemporary theological 
interpretation. Students will learn how biblical 
interpretation has been practiced and changed over 
time. Furthermore, students will consider the historical 
factors that shaped biblical interpreters and their 
interpretations. The goal of the course is to examine 
how the Bible has functioned in the past as a guide for 
contemporary theological interpretation. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
19 
BI 899 Special Issues in Bible. A seminar covering 
various current issues in biblical studies, including 
translation issues. (3) 
BI 900  Research in Bible. Individual research under 
faculty supervision. (1-3) 
BI 901 Thesis. The thesis, when chosen instead of an 
extended research paper in the Master of Arts degree, 
will be written according to guidelines available from 
the Seminary office. The student may choose to defend 
the thesis in an oral exam or make a presentation to a 
select audience. (6) 
BI 902 Thesis Re-Registration. Students not completing 
the thesis during the semester in which they register 
for it are required to re-register under the 902 course 
number each semester until the thesis is completed and 
approved. (0) 
BI 905 Biblical Studies Comprehensive Exam. An 
independent study based on a prescribed bibliography 
of important books in biblical studies.  In the exam, 
students will be required to demonstrate the ability to 
perform exegesis based on original language study 
(Greek and Hebrew), including the ability to translate a 
passage.  Students must understand, apply, evaluate 
methods of biblical scholarship, and understand the 
formation and context of the biblical text. Same as NT 
905 and OT 905. (3)  
Bible and Theology 
BT 611 Introduction to Christian Theology. An 
introduction to the key biblical beliefs that define the 
historic Christian faith (e.g. God, Christ, Holy Spirit, 
humanity, sin, salvation, etc.), with attention given to 
the credibility of such beliefs. (3) 
BT 612 Introduction to the Bible. A survey of the Old 
and New Testaments of the Christian Bible with 
emphasis on the narrative that spans them. (3) 
BT 614 Christian Worldview Studies. This course 
attempts to set out a distinctive, “Christian” approach to 
engaging culture by providing students with the critical 
tools necessary to the formation of a biblical worldview. 
The history, multiple applications, and contemporary 
criticisms of the concept of worldview will be analyzed 
in order to facilitate the kind of holistic model that is 
demanded by the Scriptures and has been evidenced in 
the practice of the faithful Church. (3) 
BT 615 Interpreting the Bible. A survey of resources, 
principles, and methods of interpreting the Bible with 
special emphasis on contemporary hermeneutical 
approaches. (3) 
BT 616 Theological Exegesis. This course treats biblical 
exegesis as a Christian Practice. The approach 
emphasizes awareness and intentionality in 
maintaining contact with Christian theology and 
biblical studies throughout the exegetical process, that 
is, practicing exegesis that is both confessional and 
critical. (3) 
BT 623 Interpreting Genesis. A study of the book of 
Genesis giving attention to its role as the first book in 
the Bible and exploring key themes in Genesis and 
beyond. (3) 
BT 627 Interpreting Deuteronomy. A study of the book 
of Deuteronomy, its literary features, canonical 
importance, and theological perspective. (3) 
BT 631  Interpreting the Psalms. An introduction to 
Hebrew poetry and approaches to interpreting the 
Psalms. (3) 
BT 640 Interpreting Isaiah. A study of the book of 
Isaiah attending to literary, historical, and theological 
concerns. (3) 
BT 644 Biblical Apocalypse. A study of the books of 
Daniel and Revelation with emphasis on interpretation 
with the genre of apocalypse. (3) 
BT 648-649 Biblical Hebrew I-II. This two-part course 
introduces students to biblical Hebrew. (6 hours) 
BT 651 The Life and Teaching of Jesus the Messiah. A 
comprehensive survey of the life, ministry, and 
teaching of Jesus, the Messiah. This course   will focus 
on the Gospels drawing a portrait of Jesus of Nazareth, 
the man and the Savior, from the Gospels. (3) 
BT 653 The Sermon on the Mount and Beyond. This 
course is a study of the origins and biblical bases of 
Christian Ethics with a focus on the Sermon on the 
Mount (Matthew 5-7). It is an exegetical study of the 
Sermon on the Mount but also is designed to help the 
student determine appropriate Christian responses to 
present day issues in personal spiritual life, family life, 
church life, and public life, as well as making decisions 
involving issues surrounding one’s nation and the 
world. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
20 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
BT 654 Jesus and Spiritual Formation. This class focuses 
on the use of the classic spiritual disciplines (e.g. 
prayer, Bible study, fasting, worship, frugality, 
meditation, evangelism, confession, etc.) in the life and 
teaching of Jesus of Nazareth. The student will explore 
each of the spiritual disciplines and learn how to 
practice the spiritual disciplines in the process of 
spiritual formation. (3) 
BT 659 Acts. An introduction to the Book of Acts 
including matters of history, chronology, biography, 
theology, soteriology, and ecclesiology, with special 
attention to the role of the Holy Spirit. (3) 
BT 661 Christianity According to Paul. An analysis of 
the Apostle Paul’s contribution to Christianity through 
an examination of all canonical New Testament 
documents concerning him and/or attributed to him. 
(3) 
BT 674 Hebrews. An introduction to the Book of 
Hebrews with a focus on the book’s rhetoric, use of the 
Old Testament, and Christology, with special attention 
to how each of these contribute to the book’s overall 
purpose. (3) 
BT 681 History of Theology. This course examines the 
story of the Church and the Christian faith throughout 
history, with a particular focus on this question: How 
did Christianity develop to the point where we are 
today? (3) 
BT 684 Theology and Postmodernity. This course 
addresses more generally the issue of the proper 
relation between secular thought or philosophy and 
Christian theology and, more specifically, the 
constructive relationships that Christian theology can 
have with more recent philosophies. (3) 
BT 689 Apologetics. An introduction to Christian 
evidences, from the Creation/Evolution debate to 
Archaeology to Theodicy (the problem of suffering) 
and beyond. Learn how to construct convincing 
presentations for unbelievers and make apologetics a 
part of your own personal ministry. (3) 
BT 691 Theological Ethics. An examination of the 
thought of Christian ethicists with application to 
contemporary problems. Course includes an emphasis 
on self-appropriation and decision making. (3) 
BT 694 Theology of Worship. This course explores the 
biblical foundations of worship through theological 
reflection on scripture along with ancient and modern 
worship practices of the church. Students will study 
worship accounts in the Old and New Testaments and 
then dialogue with both ancient and modern forms of 
worship. Emphasis will be given to developing a 
theology of worship that spans biblical, cultural, and 
ecclesiological concerns. (3) 
BT 696 Christian Theology and World Religions. A 
serious look at the major religions of the world, 
including their scriptures, and how they relate to 
Christian theology. Field trips to a mosque and a Hindu 
or Buddhist temple. Goal: to building understanding for 
“pre-evangelism,” implementing new strategies for 
connecting with outsiders. (3) 
BT 700 Capstone Paper/Project. This course assesses 
how well students have achieved the program’s five 
learning objectives through one of two means: 1) either 
a 35-45-page research paper on an approved topic or, 2) 
a field-based project completed in an approved setting. 
(3) 
BT 899 Special Issues in Bible or Theology. Specialized 
study in an area of the Bible or Theology that is not 
covered in existing courses. (3) 
BT 900 Research in Bible or Theology. Individual 
research under faculty supervision. (1-3) 
Christian Education 
CE 302 Child Theology and Spiritual Development.   This 
course investigates and examines the Biblical and 
theological foundations of children’s spirituality and 
their spiritual development. Attention will be placed on 
understanding children’s physical, social, emotional, 
intellectual, as well as spiritual formation, and exploring 
various aspects of how to help and encourage children to 
develop a deeper relationship with God and Jesus.  (3) 
CE 306 Teaching Ministry of the Church. This course is 
an overview of educational ministries for Christian 
formation, which surveys the various aspects of 
educational ministry, including its Biblical, theological, 
psychological, sociological, and philosophical 
foundations of Christian formation. It also examines the 
roles of teacher and students, aim of lesson, curriculum 
development, teaching methods, learning environment, 
and evaluation of teaching and learning processes. (3)  
CE 315 Leading and Learning in Small Groups. This 
course will equip students with a foundational 
understanding of the knowledge and skills required to 
lead small groups by incorporating spiritual, cognitive, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
21 
and experiential learning techniques. Attention will be 
given to Biblical and theological foundations, theories, 
dynamics, principles, and practices of small group 
ministries, and understanding leading small groups, 
developing leaders of small groups, devising small group 
ministries to meet various needs (including mentoring 
groups, maturity groups, ministry groups, mending 
groups, mission groups, model groups, etc.) and settings 
(children, youth, and adults), and organizing and 
administering a small group ministry. (3) 
CE 441 Ministry to Children in Crisis. A survey of the 
spiritual, emotional, social, intellectual, and physical 
needs of children aged 2-12 as they respond to a variety 
of personal and family crises. The course will address at 
an introductory level ministry models, methods, and 
resources for ministering to children who are in 
bereavement, under stress, hospitalized, abused, from 
divorced homes, in poverty, or living with parents who 
are substance abusers. Prerequisite: junior status. (3) 
CE 449 Marriage Enrichment. A course designed to lead a 
married couple to enrichment with each other and to 
equip the couple to be able to enrich the marriages of 
others. (3) 
CE 600 Teaching Ministry of the Church. An 
introduction to Christian education in the local 
congregation including its biblical-theological bases, 
relationship to spiritual formation, learning methods, 
and administrative necessities. (3) 
CE 601 Educational Leadership and Administration.  
A study of concepts of leadership and principles of 
educational administration; the development of a 
comprehensive Christian Education program is given 
major attention. (3) 
CE 604 Adult Discipleship. A survey of ministry 
methods for adults in the church, with an emphasis on 
intentional discipleship of adults, including teaching-
learning, spiritual formation, and educational 
programming in adult life. (3) 
CE 605 Human Development and Learning. A course 
designed to provide the student with an understanding 
of developmental and learning theories and their 
implications for the education and pastoral ministry. 
(3) 
CE 606 Education for Spiritual Formation. A course 
studying spiritual formation from various perspectives 
(psychology, history, theology, Bible), with application 
to personal life and congregational ministry. (3) 
CE 607 Worship and Spiritual Formation. A course 
designed to aid the student in developing an 
understanding of worship as it relates to spiritual 
growth, discipleship, and pastoral care. Attention is 
given to private worship, the impact of baptism on the 
life of the believer, the importance of ritual to 
community, and the practice of the Lord’s Supper. (3) 
CE 652 Lecture and Presentation Skills. A study and 
practicum on advanced teaching methods based on 
exegetical and literary principles in the Old and New 
Testaments. (3) 
CE 663 Theology & History of Christian Education.  
A critical reflection on the development of Christian 
education with an emphasis on the theological 
foundations of education from ancient times to the 
present times. (3) 
CE 702 Small Groups. A study and practicum on the 
theoretical basis of small group ministry in the church 
and the practical means of developing, leading, and 
equipping such a ministry. (3) 
CE 704 Leading Through Change. Change in the church 
is driven by two types of forces: changes in the 
ministry context that the congregation has no control 
over and may have no desire for, and intentional 
changes the leadership determines are desired. The 
intent of this course is to equip its participants to 
analyze the changes occurring and needing to occur in 
their respective ministry contexts, to understand the 
cultural and institutional forces which may drive or 
resist change, and to devise effective strategies for 
leading their respective churches, institutions, or 
parachurch ministries through those changes while 
minimizing, mitigating, and resolving conflict. Same as 
LS 704. (3) 
CE 706 History of Christian Spirituality. An 
investigation into the development of Christian 
spirituality with special attention to key spiritual 
masters, developments, and documents. Students will 
journal their spiritual reflections first through selected 
sections of Christian spiritual writers through the ages 
and then through the writings of a particular spiritual 
master. Same as TH 706. (3) 
CE 756 Readings in Spiritual Formation. A seminar 
focused on the writings of 20th and 21st century 
authors on Christian spirituality with an emphasis on 
developing a contemporary approach to spirituality and 
personal reflection and growth. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
22 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
CE 765 Christian Higher Education. Designed for 
students considering service in an institution of higher 
education, the course is an introduction and practicum 
in the theory, practice, and professions in Christian 
higher education. (3) 
CE 803 Instructional Strategies & Curriculum. A study 
and practicum in a wide variety of teaching strategies 
and methods with a focus on theoretical and practical 
elements of curriculum development for use in the 
church or academy. (3) 
CE 855 Research Design for Ministry. An introduction 
to social science methodology present in academic 
writing and publication, and basic statistics in 
educational research. (3) 
CE 895 Supervised Ministry Experience. A practicum in 
Christian education designed as a capstone practical 
experience with oversight provided by both on-site and 
campus mentors. (3) 
CE 899 Special Issues in Christian Education. Advanced 
study of one or more topics in the field of Christian 
Education. (3) 
CE 900 Research in Christian Education. Individual 
research under faculty supervision. (1-3 hours) 
Christian Ministry 
CM 150 Laying a Foundation for Ministry. By exploring 
the Scriptural, theological, and historical foundations of 
ministry in the local church, students will sharpen 
their calling and form a philosophy of ministry. (3) 
CM 170 Planning Congregational Worship. With 
Scripture and church history as guides, students will 
develop a working theology of congregational worship 
and identify ways to put this theology into practice in a 
worship gathering. (3) 
CM 201 Foundations of Christian Ministry. A survey of 
the Biblical, theological, and historical foundations for 
ministry in the contemporary church for students to 
identify their calling and philosophy of ministry. (3) 
CM 220 Developing a Disciple-making Culture. Having 
identified “Christlikeness” as the chief goal of local 
church ministry, students will explore faith 
development and work backwards to establish a 
practical approach to evangelism and discipleship. (3) 
CM 230 Preaching and Teaching in the Local Church. 
Armed with a theological basis for congregational 
preaching and teaching, students will learn the basic 
techniques necessary for sermon/lesson construction 
and delivery. (3) 
CM 240 Pastoring a Congregation. With an established 
pastoral theology, students will gain the skills necessary 
for practical expressions of congregational (weddings, 
funerals, etc.) and individual (basic counseling) pastoral 
services. (3) 
CM 315 Evangelism, Discipleship, and Faith 
Development. An exploration of how to develop 
Christlikeness through evangelism, discipleship, and 
faith development. (3) 
CM 317 Interpersonal Communication. An introduction 
to the basic principles of communication which exist in 
face-to-face, interpersonal situations. Theories and 
applications will be explored as they relate to this most 
common of all communication settings. Special focus 
will be given to self-awareness, audience awareness, 
listening, message development and presentation, 
managing relationships, and decision-making.  
Prerequisite: LA 113, or demonstrated proficiency in 
LA 113. (3) 
CM 325 Navigating Relational Dynamics. Knowing 
ministerial work is a highly spiritual and relational 
work – between the minister and God, within the 
ministers themselves, and the minister and others – 
students will deepen their relationship with God, while 
also exploring ways to deepen all associative ministerial 
relationships. (3) 
CM 327 Engaging with Social Issues of the Family. An 
understanding of child and adolescent growth and 
development, the current emotional and social issues 
confronting young people and their families 
(abandonment, identify formation, at-risk students, 
abuse, sexuality, drugs/alcohol, depression, suicide, 
cutting, self-esteem, pornography, etc.), and basic 
solution-focused counseling skills needed to effectively 
address these issues from a Biblical perspective. (3) 
CM 336 Contextualizing Ministry. Because every 
ministry context is unique, students will be introduced 
to the tools needed to identify and interact with the 
many shaping factors (historical, cultural, generational, 
gender, ethnicity, race, etc.) of the ministry context in 
which they find themselves. (3) 
CM 399 Special Issues in Christian Ministries. Directed 
study in the field of Christian Ministries for the student 
who desires to pursue a topic of study not covered in 
the regular curriculum. Juniors and seniors only. (1-3) 
CM 400 Orientation to Internship. An introduction to 
and preparation for the internship experience and life-
related skills for juniors, two semesters prior to the 
planned internship. (0) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
23 
CM 401 Internship in Christian Ministry. The 
internship is an undergraduate (junior and/or senior 
level) Field Experience combining classroom learning 
with ministry experience in an approved setting with 
an approved mentor evaluated according to the 
requirements stated in individually written learning 
covenants. Internship hours can be taken in a variety of 
combinations, ranging from 1-15 hours, usually in a 3-
hour course format per semester, and may be repeated 
for a maximum of 15 hours. 12 hours is the maximum 
that a student could take during a semester. (1-15) 
CM 404 Supervised Ministry Experience. These 
experiences (typically requiring at least 200 hours) will 
focus on one’s chosen area of ministry and will be 
formally evaluated through a Learning Covenant. 
Consent of advisor and the director of the Supervised 
Ministry Experience is required prior to enrolling. (4) 
CM 410 Ministerial Ethics. A course in applied ethical 
theory to the profession of ministry. Students will 
explore various ethical dilemmas associated with 
ministry and develop a decision making strategy for 
how to apply the ethical teachings of the Bible to the 
ethical dilemmas being explored. (3) 
CM 411 Christian Leadership. A study of the biblical 
principles, historical roots, theoretical development 
and practical expression of the leadership concept in 
both secular institutions and religious organizations. (3) 
CM 415 Cultivating Health Leadership. Through the 
lenses of Scripture, church history, and theory and 
practice in secular and religious contexts, students will 
explore the healthiest forms of leadership that lead to 
healthier church communities. (3) 
CM 417 Church Administration. A study of the 
principles of church administration, including 
teamwork, budget, and strategic planning in the local 
congregation. (3) 
CM 420 Pastoral Care. A course on ministry skills and 
practical expressions of pastoral services such as basic 
counseling, marriage, funerals, and other ceremonies. (3) 
CM 422 Small Groups. A study and practicum on the 
theoretical basis of small group ministry in the church 
and the practical means of developing, leading, and 
equipping such a ministry. (3) 
CM 458 Implementing Basic Counseling Techniques. 
Students will explore biblical, historical, and 
contemporary materials related to the field of Christian 
counseling to create a healthy interface of theology, 
psychology, and pastoral care. (3) 
CM 493 Leading Change in Ministry. Realizing that 
change is a necessary and normal part of ministry, 
students will be equipped to identify needed changes in 
their ministry context, understand the forces that drive 
ore resist the changes, and devise effective strategies for 
creating change. (3) 
CM 500 Preparing a Foundation for Ministry and 
Discipleship. By exploring the Scriptural, theological, and 
historical foundations of ministry and discipleship in the 
local church, students will prepare sound foundational 
principles and practices to be executed through ministry, 
evangelism, and discipleship in the local church. (3) 
CM 525 Navigating Relational Dynamics. Knowing 
ministerial work is a highly spiritual and relational 
work – between the minister and God, within the 
ministers themselves, and the minister and others – 
students will deepen their relationship with God, while 
also exploring ways to deepen all associative ministerial 
relationships. (3) 
CM 527 Engaging with Social Issues of the Family. An 
understanding of child and adolescent growth and 
development, the current emotional and social issues 
confronting young people and their families 
(abandonment, identify formation, at-risk students, 
abuse, sexuality, drugs/alcohol, depression, suicide, 
cutting, self-esteem, pornography, etc.), and basic 
solution-focused counseling skills needed to effectively 
address these issues from a Biblical perspective. (3) 
CM 536 Contextualizing Ministry. Because every 
ministry context is unique, students will be introduced 
to the tools needed to identify and interact with the 
many shaping factors (historical, cultural, generational, 
gender, ethnicity, race, etc.) of the ministry context in 
which they find themselves. (3) 
CM 600 Pastoral Care. This course attempts to open 
avenues of insight and service through pastoral care 
and crisis counseling.  The students explore biblical, 
historical, and contemporary materials to apply the 
pastoral function with a healthy interface of theology 
and psychology.  Numerous applications will be made 
in such areas of concern such as crisis intervention, 
marriage and family, decision-making, and other 
aspects of today’s ministry setting.  Procedural aspects 
of ministry will be discussed including but not limited 
to visitation in hospital and health care settings. (3) 
CM 611 Personal Development in Ministry. This course 
engages students in the ongoing process of shaping the 
heart and developing Christian character for spiritual 
leadership. It will promote greater self-awareness 
through the use of tests or inventories that address 
temperament, spiritual gifts, and leadership styles. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
24 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
CM 615 Cultivating Health Leadership. Through the 
lenses of Scripture, church history, and theory and 
practice in secular and religious contexts, students will 
explore the healthiest forms of leadership that lead to 
healthier church communities. (3) 
CM 658 Implementing Basic Counseling Techniques. 
Students will explore biblical, historical, and 
contemporary materials related to the field of Christian 
counseling to create a healthy interface of theology, 
psychology, and pastoral care. (3) 
CM 693 Leading Change in Ministry. Realizing that 
change is a necessary and normal part of ministry, 
students will be equipped to identify needed changes in 
their ministry context, understand the forces that drive 
ore resist the changes, and devise effective strategies for 
creating change. (3) 
CM 700 People and Place in Ministry. An introduction 
to the ethnographic and sociological tools needed to 
understand the people and systems of immediate 
context of ministry and its surrounding community. 
Attention is given to age, gender, race and ethnicity, 
occupational, and other forces that interact with the 
Gospel message in the work of ministry. (3) 
CM 702 Building a Team-Based Ministry. This course 
explores the biblical precedent, theological 
implications, and practical application of building 
ministry teams, developing leaders, and organizing 
ministry systems. (3) 
CM 711 Integrated Field Experience. Students will 
integrate their classroom learning into a practical 
ministry context.  The course consists of four essential 
leadership development components: ministry 
experience, mentoring/coaching, critical reflection 
practices, and cohort discussion and debriefing (with 
other students and faculty via video). (3) 
CM 712, 713, 714 Integrated Field Experience. Students 
will integrate their classroom learning into a practical 
ministry context.  The course consists of three essential 
leadership development components: ministry 
experience, mentoring/coaching, and critical reflection 
practices. CM 711 is a prerequisite (3) 
CM 715 Integrated Field Experience Students will 
integrate their classroom learning into a practical 
ministry context.  The course consists of three essential 
leadership development components: ministry 
experience, mentoring/coaching, and critical reflection 
practices. CM 711 is a prerequisite. (1-3) 
CM 722 Small Groups. A study and practicum on the 
theoretical basis of small group ministry in the church 
and the practical means of developing, leading, and 
equipping such a ministry. (3) 
CM 705 Integration Colloquy II. A faculty-supervised 
conversation/reflection group experience designed to 
facilitate the student’s biblical, historical and 
theological reflection on personal, family, seminary, 
and vocational experiences, deepening the integration 
of classroom learning and field experience. (1) 
CM 800 MDiv Integrative Capstone. This course serves as 
an integrative capstone experience for the Master of 
Divinity degree program and should be taken in the last 
year of that program.  Using the Master of Divinity 
degree program’s four student-learning outcomes as a 
framework the course is designed to assess the student’s 
readiness for effective ministry.  Effectiveness will be 
assessed by student case studies, readings, reflections, 
inventories, and presentations.  Students will be expected 
to integrate their scriptural and theological education 
with their personal formation and ministry context. (3) 
CM 891 Ministry Residency. In conjunction with an 
approved hosting church, the student will complete a 
minimum of 125 clock hours of work in ministry 
instruction and experience, as agreed on by the residency 
director at the church, the student, and Vice President of 
Academics. Residency experiences can include reading, 
writing, and research assignments in support of the 
primary ministry skills being taught in the residency. 
Students registering for this course must also be accepted 
in residency programs of approved churches, a list of 
which can be obtained from the Vice President of 
Academics. (3)  
 
Clinical Mental Health Counseling  
(Pastoral Care and Counseling) 
COUN 600 Basic Types of Counseling Ministry.  
A course opening avenues of insight and service 
through pastoral care and counseling by exploring 
biblical, historical, and contemporary material.  
Students are encouraged to apply the pastoral function 
with a healthy interface of theology and psychology. 
Specific applications are made in such areas as crisis 
intervention; marital, premarital, and family 
counseling; and cross-cultural counseling. (3) 
COUN 601 Research and Evaluation in Counseling. This 
course provides an understanding of research methods, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
25 
research designs, statistical analysis, needs assessment, 
and program evaluation. The studies found in this 
course emphasize the importance of research in 
advanced counseling professions. This course surveys 
many areas such as research methods, statistical 
methods used for research or evaluation, principles, 
models, and applications of needs assessments, use of 
research to inform evidenced based practice, and 
ethical and culturally relevant strategies for 
interpreting and reporting results. (3) 
COUN 602 Basic Counseling Techniques. This course 
provides a theoretical framework and experiential 
exposure to the interviewing and counseling skills and 
techniques that are the foundation for counseling, 
enabling the counselor to understand presenting 
problems, best practice recommendations, and effective 
intervention strategies. Students examine prevention 
and crisis intervention models, as well as self-care 
strategies. Emphasis is placed on counselor self-
understanding and self-development and the skills for 
facilitating change with diverse populations. (3) 
COUN 603 Crisis Intervention Techniques.  
This course provides a theoretical framework and 
experiential exposure to the interviewing and 
counseling skills and techniques that are the 
foundation for counseling, with a specific emphasis on 
crisis intervention and suicide prevention models. A 
lifespan perspective will address the effects of crises, 
disasters, and other trauma-causing events on persons 
of all ages. Ethical and legal considerations of crisis 
work will be explored. (3) 
COUN 662 Psychopathology. This course gives an 
introduction to the study psychopathology and 
abnormal behavior. Principles of etiology, diagnosis, 
treatment, prevention and cultural factors of mental 
and emotional disorders will be addressed. Emphasis is 
placed on mental status assessment and diagnostic 
categories as organized in the current edition of the 
DSM (or ICD). While touching on a range of disorders, 
(such as anxiety disorders, psychoses, personality 
disorders, and mental deficiencies), this course 
discusses the development of these disorders as well as 
the methods of prevention and treatment. (3) 
COUN 663 Major Theories of Counseling and 
Psychotherapy. This course is a study of the major 
theoretical approaches to counseling and 
psychotherapy used historically and currently. This 
course will discuss integration of counseling 
psychology and application. Focus will be on the main 
forces in Psychoanalytic, Cognitive-Behavioral, and 
Existential-Humanistic schools as well as the 
emergence of evidence-based practice in theory. Each 
is examined from a critical and Christian point of view. 
(3) 
COUN 666 Developmental Psychology Perspectives for 
Counseling. This course provides an investigation of the 
needs and nature of persons at all developmental levels 
and in multicultural contexts. It will include studies 
that provide an understanding of theories with 
individuals and families in their transitions and crises 
through life, theories of learning and personality 
development, and theories discussing optimal 
development and wellness through one’s life. 
Counselors will also incorporate these theories into 
prevention, intervention, and treatment methods. (3) 
COUN 667 Tests and Measures for Counseling.  
This course introduces and familiarizes the student 
with a wide range of psychometric instruments. This 
study provides an understanding of many assessments 
and discusses many areas such as historical perspective, 
basic concepts of standardized and non-standardized 
testing, other assessment techniques, statistical 
concepts, reliability, validity, and social and cultural 
factors, as well as ethical strategies for selecting, 
administering and interpreting assessments. (3) 
COUN 668 Group Theories and Practice. This course 
provides students with a theoretical and experiential 
foundation for group work. Emphasis is on a survey of 
the major theories and contributors to the field of 
group counseling. Students examine types of groups, 
leadership styles, ethical issues in group work, stages of 
group development, and integrate group theory into 
counseling practice with diverse populations. Students 
will experience group dynamics through participation 
in a group. COUN 602 and COUN 663 are prerequisites. 
(3) 
COUN 670 Counseling Children. This course is 
designed to provide students with a theoretical 
foundation and working knowledge of contemporary 
interventions for children and youth. Specific 
childhood issues (DSM-V) and treatment strategies will 
be explored. The goal is to help students develop basic 
skills necessary to effectively counsel children. Active 
involvement by students is expected inclusive of 
sharing their knowledge and personal experiences with 
the class. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
26 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
COUN 702 Counseling Children and Adolescents. This 
course provides a developmental and contextual 
approach to counseling children and adolescents.  
Developmental and systems theories will be considered 
in relation to this population, with a focus on the 
interaction of children and youth with the 
environment in which they live.  Issues specific to 
children and adolescents (DSM-5) will be explored, as 
will a variety of treatment approaches.  Other topics 
will be explored as students’ knowledge, life 
experiences, and interests dictate. (3) 
COUN 722 Introduction to Traumatology. This course 
provides an introduction to trauma-informed 
counseling.  Topics to be considered include types of 
trauma, including single incident trauma, complex 
trauma, collective trauma, and vicarious trauma; the 
effects of crisis, disasters, and trauma on diverse 
individuals across the lifespan; crisis intervention, 
trauma-informed, and community-based strategies, 
such as Psychological First Aid; procedures for 
identifying trauma and abuse and for reporting abuse; 
impact of crisis and trauma on individuals with mental 
health diagnoses; traumatic grief and loss; clinical 
assessment and treatment of acute trauma; and 
resilience. Students will be expected to address their 
biblical worldview in relation to traumatology. (3) 
COUN 723 Disaster and Acute Trauma. The focus of 
this course is on providing effective mental health care 
to individuals or groups impacted by single source 
traumas, such as interpersonal violence, accidents, 
natural disasters or workplace incidents.  Topics will 
include resilience, stress disorders as defined by the 
DSM-5, phases of disaster response, an introduction to 
the incident command system, and the provision of 
mental health and spiritual care in disasters.  Attention 
will be given to self-care for providers. (3) 
COUN 724 Traumatology: Acute and Single Source 
Trauma Therapy. This class provides the student with a 
comprehensive exploration of the psychological trauma 
field, including the history and current theories in the 
field, the nature of single source and acute trauma 
experiences (interpersonal violence, combat, accident 
and natural disasters). Attention will be given to 
understanding the bio-psychosocial effects of trauma 
and vicarious trauma. Students have the chance to 
review evidence-based practices in the trauma field for 
treating acute or single source trauma events. A variety 
of theoretical frameworks are presented, including 
cognitive, neurobiological, clinical, and socio-cultural 
(including main controversies surrounding the field of 
trauma therapy). Attention will be given to both 
vulnerability and resilience factors in symptom 
development and healing process with specific 
attention to vulnerability and resilience factors with 
spirituality and faith- based coping. Treatment 
recommendations will be addressed for trauma 
spectrum disorders including PTSD, Acute Stress, Mood 
and Anxiety reactions. COUN 602 is a prerequisite. (3) 
COUN 725 Traumatology: Understanding and Treating 
Complex Trauma. This course is designed to explore the 
theoretical, clinical, and theological aspects of complex 
trauma, abuse, and/or neglect. The development of the 
self, the dissociative self, and memory will be examined 
through the lens of attachment theory and 
neurobiology. This course also aims to deepen the 
student’s ability to respond to the question of theodicy 
and to address the potential for vicarious trauma for the 
therapist/ helper. The mediating role of culture and 
society in the perpetration and solution of trauma will 
also be explored. COUN 602 is a prerequisite. (3) 
COUN 730 Neuroscience and Counseling. This course 
will explore the impact of physiological underpinnings 
on human functioning and mental health. The student 
will learn basic neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, and 
general physiology as it relates to cognition, emotion, 
perception, movement, unconscious/conscious 
processing, behavior, and language. This course is 
designed to strengthen the knowledge and skill base of 
mental health providers by increasing their 
understanding of the relationship between biological 
function and mental health and enhancing their ability 
to responsibly integrate neuroscience into their 
practice of counseling.  Case examples will be used to 
exemplify various disorders. (3) 
COUN 740 Psychopharmacology. A survey of 
physiological and behavioral effects of the major classes 
of psychoactive drugs including therapeutic agents and 
drugs of abuse, including their therapeutic indications, 
mechanisms of action, and side effects. (3) 
COUN 745 Human Sexuality. This introduction to 
Human Sexuality will provide graduate counseling 
students and professionals with an overview of human 
sexuality. Through discussion, interactive learning 
experiences, and course assignments, students will gain 
knowledge, increased comfort, and personal insight on 
many topics. Human sexuality will be examined 
through a number of different lenses (spiritual, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
27 
personal, historical, cultural, and public health) and 
will focus on helping students integrate the physical, 
emotional, intellectual, and social aspects of sexuality. 
(3) 
COUN 751 Career Development Counseling.  
This course is designed to provide an understanding of 
career development theories and decision-making 
models that impact the lifelong processes and 
influences that lead to work values, occupational 
choices, career path/patterns, decision making style, 
and integration of self and career identity with pattern 
of work adjustment. Students will explore vocational, 
avocational, and educational information sources and 
systems. Emphasis will be placed on the career 
counseling process, techniques, and resources, as well 
as assessment instruments relevant to career planning 
for diverse populations in a global market economy. (3) 
COUN 760 Multicultural Counseling. This course is 
designed to provide an understanding of the cultural 
contexts of relationships and counseling issues among 
diverse people groups nationally and internationally. 
Culturally appropriate theories and treatment options 
will be addressed. Emphasis is placed upon experiential 
learning intended to enhance the student’s 
understanding of self and culturally diverse clients, 
including an exploration of values, beliefs, biases, 
prejudices, and the role of advocating for social justice. 
Same as IC 650. (3) 
COUN 770 Integration of Theology, Religion, and 
Spirituality in Counseling. Students will critically 
examine the implications of a Christian worldview for 
counseling practice. Students will also review the 
ethical issues relevant to the use of spiritual and 
religious interventions with individuals, couples, and 
families are considered, along with current research 
related to religion and spirituality in counseling. (3) 
COUN 772 Integrating Spirituality into Counseling. 
Integrating Spirituality into Counseling will review the 
field of counseling and how the concept of spirituality 
is understood and applied. Since religion is often 
understood to include spirituality by the field, a review 
of various world religions will be done in order to 
understand how a counselor can use facets of a person’s 
religious and spiritual views in counseling. (3) 
COUN 790 Mental Health Counseling Integrated in 
Medical Settings. The skills needed to provide clinical 
mental health services as a member of an integrated 
health care team is an emerging competency for mental 
health counselors.  This course will address the 
theories, techniques, assessment procedures, spiritual 
concerns and integrated health team roles that a 
clinician providing services in a primary care, hospital, 
or clinic environment may encounter. Topics will 
include an examination of the effect evidence-based 
and evidence informed practices for behavioral health 
assessment; brief interventions for children, 
adolescents, adults and geriatric adults; 
psychopharmacology; treating chronic pain; behavioral 
health for health conditions and collaborative 
treatment provision with medical doctors and allied 
health professionals. (3) 
COUN 802 Adolescent Development and Counseling. 
This course focuses on the significance of the 
adolescent process in the development of the whole 
personality with a view toward theories of 
development. Special interests of study include some of 
the typical crises categories and designs for healthy 
transition in the adolescent’s interaction with society 
and with the institutional structures of church, school 
and family. Biological factors, cognition and creativity, 
ego identity, sexual development, and the adolescent 
subculture will also be explored. (3) 
COUN 803 Couples Counseling. This course offers an 
overview of family and other systems theories and 
major models of family and related interventions, with 
specific emphasis on couples, marital, and pre- marital 
therapy. Students will have the opportunity to develop 
a systems perspective to enhance their understanding 
of partner dynamics. Ethics, the role of diverse 
identities, and contemporary trends will also be 
explored. (3) 
COUN 804 Family Systems Counseling. This course 
offers an overview of family and other systems theories 
and major models of family and related interventions. 
Students will have the opportunity to develop a 
systems perspective to enhance their understanding of 
family dynamics. Ethics, the role of diverse identities, 
and contemporary trends will also be explored. 
Students will participate in experiential application of 
theories and treatment models. COUN 602 is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
COUN 806 Developmental Issues in Counseling the 
Elderly. This course is an introduction to the field of 
gerontology and the treatment modalities and 
approaches to counseling older adults. Current research 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
28 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
knowledge related to gerontology and the aging process 
will be examined. An in-depth study of the special 
health needs, chronic illnesses, physiological aspects, 
and related services as applied to gerontology is 
presented. Sociological and theological implications 
will also be examined, as will approaches to counseling 
the elderly in institutional settings and the role of 
multicultural understandings on aging. Other topics to 
be included are crisis situations, leisure, relocation, 
retirement, housing, and death and dying. (3) 
COUN 807 Substance Abuse and Addictions Counseling. 
This course covers a broad survey of human addictive 
behaviors and addictions counseling. Areas such as 
chemical, psychological and social aspects of drug use, 
abuse and dependency, and effects on the family will 
be covered. This includes but is not limited to alcohol, 
illicit drugs, and sexual addictions. The discussion of 
theories, assessments, interventions, counseling 
techniques and treatment modes will also be 
emphasized. Various paradigms for addictions and 
recovery will be analyzed. (3) 
COUN 810 Ethical and Legal Issues for Counselors and 
Other Christian Leaders. This course combines a brief 
introduction to general and Christian ethics with a 
detailed examination of selected critical legal 
challenges facing today’s Christian professional in view 
of federal and State laws relevant to counselors, and 
ethics with an emphasis on the Code of Ethics of the 
American Counseling Association. Students will 
explore the legal, ethical, and professional choices faced 
by practicing human service professionals. 
A wide variety of ethical issues and topics are covered, 
including (but not limited to) ethical decision making, 
professional standards, counselor values and attitudes, 
counselor competence and supervision, client rights 
and confidentiality, dual relationships, and ethical 
issues in research and testing. This course also focuses 
on ethical issues in multicultural counseling, marital 
and family therapy, group counseling, and issues 
related to dealing with unethical behavior. Expected 
student outcome is a broad understanding of ethical 
issues in counseling. (3) 
COUN 890 Internship – Mental Health Counseling. The 
counseling internship is the final field experience of the 
counseling program. Under supervision, the intern 
completes 600 clock hours of clinical experience in an 
appropriate counseling setting (of which, at least 240 
hours of direct client service). The intern will also have 
the opportunity to become familiar with professional 
activities and resources in addition to the direct clinical 
service. The purpose of the field experience is to 
provide an opportunity to practice counseling skills in 
an applied setting under the supervision of an 
experienced practitioner and under the direction of a 
Lincoln Christian University faculty member. The 
student is required to arrange an appropriate internship 
in an approved counseling setting. While engaged in an 
internship, an appropriately licensed or certified 
therapist will directly supervise the student. The 
student is required to attend 1 ½ hours/week of group 
supervision provided by a faculty member or student 
supervisor. The Clinical Training Coordinator, in 
conjunction with the field-site supervisor, will monitor 
and evaluate the activity of the student. Expected 
student objectives include a successful formal case 
presentation to the internship seminar group and 
satisfactory field evaluations. COUN 668 COUN 760, 
COUN 804, COUN 807, and COUN 892 are 
prerequisites. This course may be completed in two 
semesters of 3 hours each or one semester of 6 hours. 
COUN 891 Clinical Pastoral Education (CPE).  
Clinical Pastoral Education is designed to be a unit of 
intensely supervised clinical experience in pastoral care 
and counseling to be taken off-campus at an accredited 
center for CPE and approved by the LCU faculty. The 
student is required to arrange an appropriate CPE in an 
approved setting. Students wishing to pursue 
chaplaincy are encouraged to check the requirements 
for their particular group affiliation. CPE units may be 
completed in two semesters of 3 hours each or one 
semester of 6 hours. Prerequisites: COUN 600  
(3-6 hours) 
COUN 892 Counseling Practicum. The counseling 
practicum is the beginning of the student’s supervised 
clinical training. Under supervision, the student 
completes 100 hours of clinical experience in an 
appropriate counseling setting over a minimum 10-
week period (of which, at least 40 hours are face- to-
face hours of direct client service). The purpose of the 
field experience is to provide an opportunity to practice 
counseling skills in an applied setting under the 
supervision of an experienced practitioner and under 
the direction of a Lincoln Christian University faculty 
member. The student is required to arrange an 
appropriate practicum in an approved counseling 
setting. While engaged in a practicum, an appropriately 
licensed or certified therapist will directly supervise the 
student. The student is required to attend 1 ½ 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
29 
hours/week of group supervision provided by a faculty 
member or student supervisor. The Clinical Training 
Coordinator, in conjunction with the field-site 
supervisor, will monitor and evaluate the activity of the 
student. Expected student objectives of the practicum 
include clinical experiences which contribute to the 
student’s growth and development as a counselor. The 
placement and service contract must be approved by 
the advisor, course supervisor, and practicum 
supervisor. Prerequisites: COUN602, COUN662, 
COUN663, and COUN810. To enroll in the Counseling 
Practicum, students must successfully complete a pre-
practicum application process. (3) 
COUN 894 Advanced Internship. The counseling 
internship is the final field experience of the counseling 
program. Under supervision, the intern completes 300 
or more clock hours of clinical experience in an 
appropriate counseling setting (of which, at least two-
fifths of the hours are direct client service). The intern 
will also have the opportunity to become familiar with 
professional activities and resources in addition to the 
direct clinical service. The purpose of the field 
experience is to provide an opportunity to practice 
counseling skills in an applied setting under the 
supervision of an experienced practitioner and under 
the direction of a Lincoln Christian University faculty 
member. The student is required to arrange an 
appropriate internship in an approved counseling 
setting. While engaged in an internship, an 
appropriately licensed or certified therapist will 
directly supervise the student. The student is required 
to attend 1½ hours/week of group supervision provided 
by a faculty member or student supervisor. The Clinical 
Training Coordinator, in conjunction with the field-
site supervisor, will monitor and evaluate the activity 
of the student. Expected student objectives include a 
successful formal case presentation to the internship 
seminar group and satisfactory field evaluations. 
Prerequisite: Successful completion of COUN 890 
Counseling Internship. (3) 
COUN 895 Supervised Clinical Ministry.  
This two-semester course is a designated alternative to 
COUN 891 Clinical Pastoral Education. Participating 
students must be in an active ministry context in which 
they are accountable for various pastoral ministry 
functions. Both individual and peer group supervision 
will challenge the students to evaluate psychological, 
theological, and pastoral functions. Interpersonal group 
experience will encourage personal growth and 
spiritual formation. Enrollment is limited and by 
special application only. (6) 
COUN 897 The Counseling Profession: Clinical Practices 
Seminar. A course designed for Master of Arts in 
Counseling students who expect to enter practice as 
Licensed Professional Counselors. The course covers 
such topics as pastoral identity in the context of the 
mental health community, clinical interviewing and 
treatment planning, legal and “standard of practice” 
issues, financial concerns and policies, licensure issues, 
supervision, and ethical concerns. (3) 
COUN 899 Special Issues in Pastoral Care and 
Counseling. Specialized study of an area of counseling 
not covered in existing courses. COUN 602 is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
COUN 900 Research in Pastoral Care and Counseling. 
Individual research under faculty supervision in a 
particular area of Pastoral Care and Counseling studies. 
(1-3) 
Credit for Prior Learning (CPL) 
Students who need additional credit in the areas of 
General Education or transferrable elective 
requirements may be able to earn additional semester 
hours through Credit for Prior Learning portfolios, 
following the policy guidelines described under “Credit 
for Prior Learning” on page 56. Qualified students who 
seek such credit must also enroll in the following 
course: 
CPL 101 Focused Writing. This online course prepares 
qualified students for the process of developing a 
portfolio for the assessment of prior learning for the 
purpose of being awarded college credit from life 
experiences. Course elements emphasize experiential 
learning theory, synthesis of prior learning experiences, 
development of goals and an education plan, research 
methods and resources to document learning, and the 
preparation of a portfolio, that includes a timeline, 
autobiography, and formal documentation of prior 
learning. (3) 
CPL 299 Credit for Prior Learning. CPL lower course 
credits are the result of demonstrated learning from a 
variety of sources including workshops, seminars, self-
study, non-credit classes, training programs, and work-
related learning. Please note that it is the learning, not 
merely the experience, from these sources that is 
evaluated and results in credits being awarded. (1-27, 
with 3-hour increments most common). 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
30 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
CPL 399 Credit for Prior Learning. CPL upper course 
credits are the result of demonstrated learning from a 
variety of sources including workshops, seminars, self-
study, non-credit classes, training programs, and work-
related learning. Please note that it is the learning, not 
merely the experience, from these sources that is 
evaluated and results in credits being awarded. (1-27, 
with 3-hour increments most common) 
History 
HI 176 American History I. The course will be a study of 
the development of the United States from its colonial 
origins through the end of Reconstruction. The course 
will emphasize the ideas that guided the country’s 
political, social and cultural development as well as the 
analysis of primary source documents. (3) 
HI 399 Readings in History. A study of specific  historical 
periods or problems with attention given to primary 
source and historiographical texts. (1-3) 
Intercultural Studies (Missions) 
IC 603 Cultural Insights for Effective Ministry and 
Missions. An introductory study in applied cultural 
anthropology, this course is designed to provide students 
with basic anthropological insights and practical 
applications to increase their effectiveness in 
understanding the culture(s) of their ministry setting(s) 
in order to more effectively communicate the Gospel of 
Christ. (3) 
IC 611 Cross-cultural Communication. This course is 
designed to acquaint students with the challenges and 
complexities involved in cross-cultural communication. 
In addition to studies on communication theory and 
culture, particular attention will be given to the unique 
challenges faced when communicating the Gospel 
message across cultures. (3) 
IC 613 Global Christianity. This course will engage 
students with the global character of the Church as 
well as ministry in the multifaith and multicultural 
context of contemporary society. This will include 
attention to the wide diversity of religious traditions 
present in potential ministry settings, as well as 
expressions of social justice and respect congruent with 
Christian commitment. (Same as TH 613) (3) 
IC 630 Worship in Cultural Context. A study of the 
impact of culture on worship practices. Emphasis is 
placed on the relationship between worship and 
evangelism, and attention is given to choosing 
appropriate styles for a given context without 
sacrificing content. Attention will be given to the 
manner in which various cultures experience God and 
an understanding of spirituality in the 
modern/postmodern context. (Same as WS 603) (3) 
IC 642 Spiritual Dynamics of Missions.  
An examination of the spiritual dynamics that affect 
both the practice and the practitioner of mission.  This 
course will provide a biblical and practical study on the 
nature of the spiritual life, the mechanics required to 
live that life well, and the spiritual forces arrayed 
against God’s mission. (3) 
IC 644 Global Christianity. An examination of the 
history of Christianity from the beginning of the 
Church to the present. Emphasis will be placed on 
people, events, and Church especially involving or 
affecting Christian missions. (Same as CH 750) (3) 
IC 650 Multicultural Counseling. This course is 
designed to provide an understanding of the cultural 
contexts of relationships and counseling issues among 
diverse people groups nationally and internationally. 
Culturally appropriate theories and treatment options 
will be addressed. Emphasis is placed upon experiential 
learning intended to enhance the student’s 
understanding of self and culturally diverse clients, 
including an exploration of values, beliefs, biases, 
prejudices, and the role of advocating for social justice. 
(Same as COUN 760) (3) 
IC 655 Field Experience in Intercultural Studies.  
This experience-based course allows students to apply 
the objectives of the program and participate in 
intercultural engagement in a practical and substantive 
way. A proposal for both the practicum and the field 
supervisor must be submitted to and approved by the 
program director prior to registering for and starting 
this course. A minimum of 75 hours of field work are 
required in addition to one-on-one mentoring and 
reading/writing on topics related to the field 
experience. (3) 
IC 661 Research Methods in Missions. An introduction 
and overview of the various research methods helpful 
to missionaries and other cross- cultural practitioners 
in a variety of intercultural and congregational settings. 
(3) 
IC 701 Christian Encounter with World Religions.   
An examination of the world’s major religions (e.g. 
Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism) from a Christian 
perspective with a special emphasis on past and present 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
31 
missiological theories and practices for engaging, 
dialoguing with, and evangelizing adherents of these 
religions. (3) 
IC 702 Theology of Mission and Evangelism. A study of 
the theology of Christian mission from the perspectives 
of the Old and New Testaments, emphasizing principles 
which bear on our understanding of mission today, 
especially with regard to the message, the missionary, 
and missionary practices. Contemporary mission 
theories and practices will be evaluated in light of a 
Biblical theology of mission. (3) 
IC 746 Contextualization.  An analysis of the theory and 
practice of contextualization that will introduce 
students to the prominent theories and researchers 
within the field, as well as provide an overview of the 
areas of missions and ministry where contextualization 
is needed (e.g. theology, teaching, preaching, church 
planting, etc.). (3) 
IC 751 Ministering in the Town and Country Church.  
An overview of ministry in the town and country 
community and church with an emphasis on 
understanding the varied types of contexts and how 
each affects pastoral work and strategy.  The town and 
country culture is experienced as well as studied during 
the class. (Same as LS 751) (3) 
IC 899 Special Issues in Intercultural Studies. 
Specialized study of an area of Intercultural Studies not 
covered in existing courses. (1-3) 
IC 900 Research in Intercultural Studies. Individual 
research under faculty supervision in a particular area 
of Intercultural Studies. (1-3 hours) 
Interdisciplinary Studies (IDS) 
Many of the required hours in General Education are 
taken in Interdisciplinary Studies, which help students 
discern relationships among various disciplines, discover 
worldviews expressed within these disciplines, and 
evaluate these disciplines from a Christian perspective. It 
provides an integral part of a student’s Christian 
education, regardless of his or her vocational goals. The 
IDS requirement consists of ID 101 which serves as a 
prerequisite for 3 additional semesters of required ID 
subject focused courses for a total of 12 semester hours. 
Each of the 4 required ID courses is taught by an 
instructor specializing in the subject of focus and may also 
include contributions made by faculty with academic 
specializations in other disciplines.  
ID 101 Introduction to Worldview and the Christian 
Mind. This course will consider the concepts of 
worldview and Christian thinking.  Students will then 
apply these concepts in societal analyses.  (3) 
ID 117 Western Civilization I. This course will survey the 
development of Western civilization from the Ancient 
Near East to the 16th century. The course will focus on 
engaging primary source texts and critical writing, and 
will utilize worldview as the primary analytical lens for 
the history of the West. As an interdisciplinary course the 
class will include history, literature, philosophy, visual art 
and architecture. IAI Code H2 901. (3) 
ID 118 Western Civilization II. This course will survey the 
development of Western civilization from the 15th 
century to nearly the present day. The course will focus 
on engaging primary source texts and critical writing, and 
will utilize worldview as the primary analytical lens for 
the history of the West. As an interdisciplinary course the 
class will include history, church history, visual art and 
architecture. IAI Code H2 902. (3) 
ID 238 Ancient Rome. This course will survey the 
development of Rome from its founding until its western 
collapse in A.D. 476 and will emphasize its place in 
Western history. The course will focus on engaging 
primary source texts and critical writing, and will utilize 
worldview as its primary analytical lens. As an 
interdisciplinary course the class will include history, 
literature, theology, visual art and architecture. (3) 
ID 309 Dante. This course studies Dante Alighieri’s 
great medieval epic, The Divine Comedy, both in terms 
of Dante’s literary achievement and in the way his 
work embodies the Christian worldview of Thomas 
Aquinas. (3) 
ID 310 Rome and the Early Church. This course will 
explore the impact that Rome had on the church, and 
the impact that the church had on Rome through a 
study of the intertwined development of Rome and the 
early church. As an interdisciplinary studies course, we 
will consider developments in visual art, architecture, 
history, church history, literature, and theology. (3) 
ID 313 The Crusades. This course surveys the history of 
the Christian religious wars waged in Palestine and 
Europe after 1095. Issues considered include crusade as 
an expression of the “Age of Faith,” the reactions of 
Christians and non-Christians to crusade, the artistic 
expressions of the crusades and the theological 
implications of the crusading movement. As an 
interdisciplinary studies course we will consider 
history, literature, visual art, theology/religious studies, 
church history and music. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
32 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
ID 326 Augustine. A seminar style reading and discussion 
based course centered around the life and works of St. 
Augustine of Hippo. A broad survey of Augustine’s 
thought and life will be followed by a careful reading 
through specific texts, such as Confessions, City of God, 
On the Trinity, or selected sermons and letters. (3) 
ID 327 Lewis, Tolkien, and the Theological Imagination. 
A seminar style, reading and discussion-based course, 
giving students the chance to explore the broader 
corpus of either C.S. Lewis or J.R.R. Tolkien (focus 
varies by year). The class will engage the writings of 
one of these authors with attention paid to worldview, 
philosophical, theological, and literary issues. (3) 
ID 331 Non-Western Philosophy. This interdisciplinary 
course examines philosophy as it came to exist outside of 
the Graeco-Roman and subsequent Western tradition; to 
do so, it will also interact with the practice of religion in 
these areas and in aspects of intercultural studies. Each 
iteration of this course will focus on the philosophical 
(and often religious) traditions of a specific set of non-
western cultures. Examples of these foci would include 
classical Chinese philosophy (dealing with Confucianism, 
Daoism, and Buddhism), South Asian philosophy (dealing 
with Vedic, Upanishadic, and Buddhist philosophy), and 
Islamic philosophy. Course may be repeated as topic 
varies. (3) 
ID 336 History of Gender and Christianity. This course 
provides students with a historical survey of the 
complex relationship between gender, theology, 
culture, and hermeneutics, beginning with scripture 
and the early church then transitioning through the 
medieval and modern periods to the present day.  This 
will equip students with the philosophical language, 
historical awareness, and theological tools required to 
engage in an informed manner with contemporary 
discussions about masculinity, femininity, society, and 
the church. (3) 
ID 341 History of Christian Thought and Culture: Greek 
Philosophy to the Reformation. This course surveys the 
history of ancient and medieval Christian thought within 
the embodied cultural, political, geographic, scientific, 
and artistic contexts that helped birth and mold it. Setting 
the stage with Greek philosophy and the Greco-Roman 
world, we then transition to the early church through the 
fall of Rome and the Middle Ages, culminating with the 
Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation. (3) 
ID 342 History of Christian Though and Culture II: 
Modernity and the Restoration Movement. This course 
surveys the history of modern and contemporary 
Christian thought within the embodied cultural, political, 
geographic, scientific, and artistic contexts that helped 
birth and mold it. Beginning with Descartes, the Thirty 
Years War, and the rise of Secularism, we then transition 
to the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment 
through to the formation of modern Europe and the 
West, culminating with globalization, postmodernity, and 
the reshaping of Christianity in the 20th and 21st 
centuries. This broader narrative will be juxtaposed with 
the history and thought of the Restoration Movement, 
equipping students to see recent developments in light of, 
and in conversation with, our own identity and history. 
(3) 
ID 343 Philosophy of Science. This course examines the 
philosophical presuppositions inherent in science while 
chronicling the history and debate around those 
presuppositions. Key themes will likely include the 
epistemological question of how we can know anything at 
all, the nature of time and space, the Quantum 
revolution, the relationship between science, ethics, and 
religion, and key figures responsible for paradigm shifts in 
the history of science (e.g., Aristotle, Copernicus, Bacon, 
Newton, Faraday, Darwin, Einstein). (3) 
ID 345 God and the Holocaust. A course designed to 
challenge students to wrestle with the Holocaust and 
the perceived presence/absence of God in the midst of 
human suffering. Special attention will be paid to how 
the Holocaust impacted subsequent theology, 
philosophy, literature, comic books, art, and film. 
(Warning: some students may find the content 
potentially upsetting.) (3) 
ID 368 Introduction to Mythology. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring mythology 
from a variety of primarily, though not exclusively, 
Western cultures (e.g., Greek, Norse, Egyptian, 
Arthurian) while also providing a Christian perspective 
on the importance of the mythological imagination as 
well as the role and genre of “true myths.” (3) 
ID 437 Race, Gender, and Evangelicalism. A seminar 
style, reading and discussion based course probing the 
explosive history and relationship between Evangelicals, 
gender, and race, particularly – though not exclusively – 
with the United States.  Students will be equipped with a 
broader historical, biblical, philosophical, and 
theological framework upon which to draw when 
engaging with culture and the church regarding these 
sensitive topics. (3) 
ID 440 Women’s Spiritual Writings. A seminar style, 
readings and discussion based class highlighting seminal 
female texts in the Christian tradition. Author rotations 
will likely include, but not be limited to, Julian of 
Norwich, Margery Kempe, Hildegard of Bingen, 
Catherine of Siena, Theresa of Avila, Susanna Wesley, 
Margaret Fell, Hannah More, Catherine Booth, 
Josephine Butler, Phoebe Palmer, Octavia Albert, 
Dorothy Day, and Maya Angelou. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
33 
ID 456 New Age Thought and Practice. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course tracing the roots of 
New Age thought in Western Esotericism, Theosophy, 
and Spiritualism through to the explosion of New Age 
spirituality in the 1960s and 70s, with special reference 
to its on-going influence on contemporary culture. In 
addition to standard readings, the course materials will 
incorporate a variety of mediums, especially films and 
novels. (3) 
ID 462 Plato. A seminar style, reading and discussion 
based course primarily engaging with the Dialogues of 
Plato, with some brief interludes to relevant historical 
episodes (e.g., Neoplatonism, Augustine, the 
Renaissance, Cambridge Platonism). (3) 
ID 477 Religion and Fiction.  A seminar style course built 
around reading multiple works of fiction in their entirety 
and discussing them together at length. Text selection 
will vary from year to year, though regular authors would 
include the likes of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Graham Greene, 
Flannery O’Connor, G.K Chesterton, George MacDonald, 
Shusaku Endo, and Marilynne Robinson. (3) 
ID 496 Seminar on Charles Taylor. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring the 
thought of Catholic philosopher Charles Taylor.  Each 
iteration of the course will involve an in-depth reading 
and analysis of one to two primary works, such as A 
Secular Age, Sources of the Self, or The Malaise of 
Modernity. (3) 
ID 610 Rome and the Early Church. This course will 
explore the impact that Rome had on the church, and 
the impact that the church had on Rome through a 
study of the intertwined development of Rome and the 
early church. As an interdisciplinary studies course, we 
will consider developments in visual art, architecture, 
history, church history, literature, and theology. (3) 
ID 613 The Crusades. This course surveys the history of 
the Christian religious wars waged in Palestine and 
Europe after 1095. Issues considered include crusade as 
an expression of the “Age of Faith,” the reactions of 
Christians and non-Christians to crusade, the artistic 
expressions of the crusades and the theological 
implications of the crusading movement. As an 
interdisciplinary studies course we will consider 
history, literature, visual art, theology/religious studies, 
church history and music. (3) 
ID 626 Augustine. A seminar style reading and discussion 
based course centered around the life and works of St. 
Augustine of Hippo. A broad survey of Augustine’s 
thought and life will be followed by a careful reading 
through specific texts, such as Confessions, City of God, 
On the Trinity, or selected sermons and letters. (3) 
ID 627 Lewis, Tolkien, and the Theological Imagination. 
A seminar style, reading and discussion-based course, 
giving students the chance to explore the broader 
corpus of either C.S. Lewis or J.R.R. Tolkien (focus 
varies by year). The class will engage the writings of 
one of these authors with attention paid to worldview, 
philosophical, theological, and literary issues. (3) 
ID 637 Race, Gender, and Evangelicalism. A seminar 
style, reading and discussion based course probing the 
explosive history and relationship between Evangelicals, 
gender, and race, particularly – though not exclusively – 
with the United States.  Students will be equipped with a 
broader historical, biblical, philosophical, and 
theological framework upon which to draw when 
engaging with culture and the church regarding these 
sensitive topics. (3) 
ID 640 Women’s Spiritual Writings. A seminar style, 
readings and discussion based class highlighting seminal 
female texts in the Christian tradition. Author rotations 
will likely include, but not be limited to, Julian of 
Norwich, Margery Kempe, Hildegard of Bingen, 
Catherine of Siena, Theresa of Avila, Susanna Wesley, 
Margaret Fell, Hannah More, Catherine Booth, 
Josephine Butler, Phoebe Palmer, Octavia Albert, 
Dorothy Day, and Maya Angelou. (3) 
ID 641 History of Christian Thought and Culture: Greek 
Philosophy to the Reformation. This course surveys the 
history of ancient and medieval Christian thought within 
the embodied cultural, political, geographic, scientific, 
and artistic contexts that helped birth and mold it. Setting 
the stage with Greek philosophy and the Greco-Roman 
world, we then transition to the early church through the 
fall of Rome and the Middle Ages, culminating with the 
Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation. (3) 
ID 642 History of Christian Though and Culture II: 
Modernity and the Restoration Movement. This course 
surveys the history of modern and contemporary 
Christian thought within the embodied cultural, political, 
geographic, scientific, and artistic contexts that helped 
birth and mold it. Beginning with Descartes, the Thirty 
Years War, and the rise of Secularism, we then transition 
to the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment 
through to the formation of modern Europe and the 
West, culminating with globalization, postmodernity, and 
the reshaping of Christianity in the 20th and 21st 
centuries. This broader narrative will be juxtaposed with 
the history and thought of the Restoration Movement, 
equipping students to see recent developments in light of, 
and in conversation with, our own identity and history. 
(3) 
ID 643 Philosophy of Science. This course examines the 
philosophical presuppositions inherent in science while 
chronicling the history and debate around those 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
34 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
presuppositions. Key themes will likely include the 
epistemological question of how we can know anything at 
all, the nature of time and space, the Quantum 
revolution, the relationship between science, ethics, and 
religion, and key figures responsible for paradigm shifts in 
the history of science (e.g., Aristotle, Copernicus, Bacon, 
Newton, Faraday, Darwin, Einstein). (3) 
ID 656 New Age Thought and Practice. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course tracing the roots of 
New Age thought in Western Esotericism, Theosophy, 
and Spiritualism through to the explosion of New Age 
spirituality in the 1960s and 70s, with special reference 
to its on-going influence on contemporary culture. In 
addition to standard readings, the course materials will 
incorporate a variety of mediums, especially films and 
novels. (3) 
ID 662 Plato. A seminar style, reading and discussion 
based course primarily engaging with the Dialogues of 
Plato, with some brief interludes to relevant historical 
episodes (e.g., Neoplatonism, Augustine, the 
Renaissance, Cambridge Platonism). (3) 
ID 668 Introduction to Mythology. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring mythology 
from a variety of primarily, though not exclusively, 
Western cultures (e.g., Greek, Norse, Egyptian, 
Arthurian) while also providing a Christian perspective 
on the importance of the mythological imagination as 
well as the role and genre of “true myths.” (3) 
ID 677 Religion and Fiction.  A seminar style course built 
around reading multiple works of fiction in their entirety 
and discussing them together at length. Text selection 
will vary from year to year, though regular authors would 
include the likes of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Graham Greene, 
Flannery O’Connor, G.K Chesterton, George MacDonald, 
Shusaku Endo, and Marilynne Robinson. (3) 
Language and Communication 
LA 101 Writing Studies 1. This is the first course in a 
two-semester sequence of composition. Students will 
be introduced to a rhetorical approach to academic 
writing as a collaborative process of drafting, revising, 
and editing thesis-driven essays. Emphasis will be 
placed on critical reading and analysis, and course 
topics will include elements of style and standard 
composition. Successful completion of this course 
requires a grade of C or better. IAI Code C1 900R. (3) 
LA 102 Writing Studies 2. This is the second course in a 
two-semester sequence designed to enhance the critical 
skills of argumentation and academic writing introduced 
in LA 101 Writing Skills 1, developing greater depth and 
sophistication in both style and subject matter. He 
course will reinforce student experience with the 
conventions of standard English, documentation and 
research. Prerequisite: successful completion of LA 101 
with a grade of C or better. IAI Code C1 901R. (3) 
LA 113 Introduction to Speech. A study and practice of 
basic principles involved in discovering, arranging, 
delivering, and evaluating ideas in speech situations. 
IAI Code C2 900. (3) 
LA 211, 212 Modern Languages. A study of the 
fundamentals of various modern languages, including 
vocabulary, basic grammar, and conversational/reading 
skills. Languages offered depends on personnel 
availability. (2-3) 
LA 220 Introduction to Creative Writing. This class is an 
introductory level creative writing class in which the 
primary principles of poetry and fiction will be 
addressed, with some limited inclusion of creative 
nonfiction. This workshop designed course is meant to 
spark literary interests, talents, and inclinations, so that 
students may gain clearer image of who they are as 
writers. The course will include a large amount of 
reading of both short stories and poetry as well as a 
substantial creation of original works. Students will be 
expected to critique the works of peers and to submit 
their own work to similar critique. Prerequisite: of a C 
or better in LA 101 is required, and a C or better in LA 
102 is recommended. (2-3) 
Leadership Studies 
LS 602 Theology of Leadership for Christian Ministry. 
This course seeks to help the student develop a Biblical 
theology of leadership to inform both the theory and 
the practice of leadership. Primary biblical themes and 
metaphors will be explored to see how they impact 
one’s approach to leadership. Such leadership concepts 
and competencies as strategic planning, organizing, 
group process and team development, communication 
and conflict-resolution skills, and leading through 
change will be emphasized. CM 611 is suggested. (3) 
LS 603 Foundations of Chaplaincy. This course provides 
a foundational understanding of the ministry of 
Chaplaincy as the ability to minister compassionately 
to those of your faith, those of different faiths, and 
those of no faith in the name of Christ within a 
pluralistic context. The course explores the similarities 
and differences various contexts of chaplaincy, and 
introduces the basic functions of a chaplain as spiritual 
counselor, ethical advisor, and compassionate 
caregiver. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
35 
LS 607 Ministry and Leadership Ethics. This course 
focuses on the ethics of character and behavior, 
particularly as they relate to the ministry leader and 
church staff pastor. Attention will be directed toward 
the theological foundations for ethical behavior, the 
nature of integrity and faithfulness on the part of a 
minister, the reality of cultural influences upon ethical 
standards, and specific commitments and behaviors 
that constitute ethical conduct within a variety of 
realms of ministry and church life. Case studies will be 
presented and considered. The intended outcome for 
each student is the completion a code of ethics 
appropriate to that student’s context. (3) 
LS 704 Leading Through Change. Change in the church 
is driven by two types of forces: changes in the 
ministry context that the congregation has no control 
over and may have no desire for, and intentional 
changes the leadership determines are desired. The 
intent of this course is to equip its participants to 
analyze the changes occurring and needing to occur in 
their respective ministry contexts, to understand the 
cultural and institutional forces which may drive or 
resist change, and to devise effective strategies for 
leading their respective churches, institutions, or 
parachurch ministries through those changes while 
minimizing, mitigating, and resolving conflict. Same as 
CE 704. (3) 
LS 710 Dynamics of Effective Interpersonal Leadership. 
A course designed to cultivate effective leadership 
behavior. Through hands-on experiential learning, peer 
feedback, and use of real-life case scenarios, 
participants will understand the dynamics of 
interpersonal behavior and develop skills to lead more 
effectively. (3) 
LS 751 Ministering in the Town and Country Church. 
An overview of ministry in the town and country 
community and church with an emphasis on 
understanding the varied types of contexts and how 
each affects pastoral work and strategy. The town and 
country culture is experienced as well as studied during 
the class. Same as IC 751. (3) 
LS 752 Leading in the Town and Country Church.  
A look at how town and country residents think and 
the spiritual and social tools required to lead them. The 
course examines the standard issues of church 
leadership as they apply to the town and country 
church. It also touches on the role of the pastor as 
community leader. (3) 
LS 753 Faith Communication in a Town and Country 
Context. The oral culture and intimacy of the town and 
country context present a unique set of circumstances 
for preaching, evangelism, discipleship, and youth and 
children’s ministries. This course explores the ways 
town and country culture impacts and reshapes the 
common methods and strategies for communicating the 
Gospel. (3) 
LS 754 Pastoral Care in a Town and Country Context. 
Pastors in isolated settings find themselves facing a 
large number of pastoral care issues, some unique to the 
context, with less help than their suburban and urban 
counterparts have available. This course looks at some 
of the stresses town and country life places on pastors 
and their families as well as those in the church, and 
explores ways pastors can keep themselves spiritually, 
emotionally, and physically healthy and thereby able to 
offer pastoral care to others. (3) 
LS 755 Seminar in Town and Country Ministry. 
Students in this course will research a topic in Town 
and Country Ministry and present their finds to the 
class in a collaborative learning environment. The 
instructor will suggest topics and offer reading lists, and 
students may suggest topics of special interest. (3) 
LS 797 Leadership Ministry and Legal Issues. A study of 
the legal environment in which the church or 
parachurch organization presently exists and the legal 
challenges that its leaders will face now and in the 
future. (3) 
LS 892 Field Experience. Field experience will be 
structured to expose the student to a variety of ministry 
contexts and challenges. The experience will serve as a 
learning lab for analysis and practical application of the 
ministry courses. A qualified ministry mentor who is 
embedded in the field experience context will also 
coach and evaluate the student. (3) 
LS 899 Special Issues in Leadership Studies. Specialized 
study of an area of Leadership Studies not covered in 
existing courses. (3) 
LS 900 Research in Leadership Studies. Individual 
research under faculty supervision in a particular area 
of Leadership Studies. (1-3) 
LS 905 Field Experience Capstone Project.  
The capstone course is a summative, integrative 
experience of the entire program, including theological 
and personal reflection on the practical application of 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
36 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
the program’s content in a supervised ministry context. 
(3) 
Mathematics 
MA 197 Math for Life. A course focusing on mathematical 
reasoning and the solving of real-life problems, rather than 
on routine skills and appreciation. Topics to be studied will 
be chosen from management science, statistics, coding, 
social choice and decision-making, geometrical ideas, 
modeling, graph theory, loci/set theory, finance, and 
problem-solving strategies. (3) 
MA 295 Statistics. An examination of descriptive and 
inferential statistics, including frequency distributions, 
estimation, hypothesis testing, t-tests, nonparametric 
procedures, ANOVA, correlation, regression, and 
sampling, with an emphasis on reasoning, problem 
solving, and utilizing statistics within a team-based 
research project. IAI Code M1 902 (3) 
New Testament1 
NT 104 New Testament I. A course designed to examine 
the life of Jesus and the early church, focusing on an 
overview of the contents and theology of the Gospels 
and Acts. (3) 
NT 118 Survey of the New Testament. An introduction to 
the history, content, theology, and rhetoric of the New 
Testament, encouraging students to embrace its teaching 
as part of the Christian Bible. (3) 
NT 301 New Testament II. This course is an introduction 
to the Pauline epistles, general epistles, and Revelation, 
focusing on an overview of the contents and theology of 
the writings as well as discussions of the issues 
surrounding the interpretation of epistolary and 
apocalyptic genres. (3) 
NT 310 Greek Basics. An introduction to the basics of 
the Greek language, with focus on using the language 
in a ministry setting. In using examples from the Greek 
New Testament, the course is designed to prepare 
students to use the basics of the language (e.g., 
grammar, syntax, the meaning of words, etc.) in 
interpreting Scripture. NT 311 is a continuation of this 
course. (3) 
NT 311 Greek Exegesis. By building on NT 310, this 
course will emphasize using the Greek NT in the 
exegetical (interpretative) process. Students will 
develop a method for using the Greek text, English 
                                                      
1 NT courses are English language based, NTG courses are 
Greek language based. 
translations, and other appropriate tools to understand 
the context, grammar, syntax, word meanings, 
theology, and contemporary meaning of New 
Testament texts. Attention will be given to how to use 
the New Testament in preaching and teaching. Greek 
proficiency or NT 310 is a prerequisite. (3) 
NT 432 Exegesis of the Gospels. An exegetical study of 
one or more of the gospels with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, the literary 
relationships between the gospels, and contemporary 
significance. (3) 
NT 434 Exegesis of the Book of Acts. An exegetical 
study of the Book of Acts with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. Hermeneutical questions concerning how 
Acts relates to the contemporary church will also be 
addressed. (3) 
NT 435 Exegesis of the Pauline Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the Pauline epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
NT 438 Exegesis of the General Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the general epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
NT 439 Exegesis of Revelation. An exegetical study of 
the Book of Revelation with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. (3) 
NT 605 Advanced New Testament Introduction.  
A critical introduction to the background, content, and 
interpretation of the New Testament corpus, with a 
focus on historical context, special issues confronting 
selected books, and making the transition from what 
the text meant in its initial setting to what it means in a 
contemporary environment. (3) 
NT 610 Greek Basics. An introduction to the basics of 
the Greek language, with focus on using the language 
in a ministry setting. In using examples from the Greek 
New Testament, the course is designed to prepare 
students to use the basics of the language (e.g., 
grammar, syntax, the meaning of words, etc.) in 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
37 
interpreting Scripture. NT 611 is a continuation of this 
course. (3) 
NT 611 Greek Exegesis. By building on NT 610, this 
course will emphasize using the Greek NT in the 
exegetical (interpretative) process. Students will 
develop a method for using the Greek text, English 
translations, and other appropriate tools to understand 
the context, grammar, syntax, word meanings, 
theology, and contemporary meaning of New 
Testament texts. Attention will be given to how to use 
the New Testament in preaching and teaching. Greek 
proficiency or NT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
NT 631 Exegesis of a Synoptic Gospel. An exegetical 
study of a synoptic Gospel in the Greek text with 
attention to the theological themes, structure, historical 
setting, its relationships to the other Gospels, and 
interpretation of selected portions. NT 611 is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
NT 632 Exegesis of the Gospels. An exegetical study of 
one or more of the gospels with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, the literary 
relationships between the gospels, and contemporary 
significance. (3) 
NT 634 Exegesis of the Book of Acts. An exegetical 
study of the Book of Acts with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. Hermeneutical questions concerning how 
Acts relates to the contemporary church will also be 
addressed. (3) 
NT 635 Exegesis of the Pauline Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the Pauline epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
NT 638 Exegesis of the General Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the general epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
NT 639 Exegesis of Revelation. An exegetical study of 
the Book of Revelation with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. (3) 
NT 650 Preaching from the New Testament. A team- 
taught course designed to provide the student with the 
skills to interpret and preach responsibly from the 
books of the New Testament. Greek proficiency or NT 
610 is a prerequisite; PR 601 is also prerequisite unless 
special permission is granted by the instructor. Same as 
PR 650. (3) 
NT 702 New Testament Use of the Old Testament.  
An examination of New Testament quotations of the Old 
Testament in order to understand the New Testament’s 
exegetical and hermeneutical methodology. Greek and 
Hebrew proficiency are prerequisites. Same as OT 702. 
(3) 
NT 724 Advanced Greek Readings. This course 
concentrates on translating more advanced Greek 
readings from a range of texts including the New 
Testament, the Septuagint, the Apostolic Fathers, and 
others. NT 611 is a prerequisite. (3) 
NT 725 Aramaic. Study of Aramaic, including Old 
Testament, Inscriptional Aramaic, Qumranic, and 
Targumic Aramaic. (Same as OT 725) Hebrew 
proficiency or OT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
NT 728 Septuagint. A study of the Greek version of the 
Old Testament and the Apocrypha, including its origin, 
transmission, and significance. (Same as OT 728) Greek 
proficiency or NT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
NT 741 Second Temple Judaism. A study of the history 
and literature of the Intertestamental Period with 
particular emphasis given to connections between the 
Old and New Testaments as well as to developments 
which aid in the understanding of the writings of the 
New Testament. Students will be familiarized with 
political, social, and cultural issues related to 
understanding this historical period through the use of 
primary and secondary readings and through a focused 
and guided research project. Same as OT 741. (3) 
NT 754 Text and Canon of the Bible. An examination of 
the historical, theological, and textual factors involved 
in the development of the biblical canon, covering both 
what became the Old and New Testaments and what 
did not. Same as OT 754. (3) 
NT 808 New Testament Theology. An investigation of 
the writings of the New Testament that seeks to 
determine their distinctive theological emphases, 
ascertain common theological themes throughout the 
New Testament canon, and situate the findings within 
a Biblical Theology of both Testaments. (3) 
NT 827 History of New Testament Scholarship.  An 
overview of New Testament scholarship from the early 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
38 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
church to the contemporary world. The course 
introduces major figures and themes in the history of 
scholarship, including biblical authority, methods of 
interpretation, and the role of the human sciences (e.g. 
philology, sociology, etc.) in interpretation especially 
since the rise of historical criticism. (3) 
NT 899 Special Issues in New Testament. Specialized 
study of an area of New Testament not covered in 
existing courses. (3) 
NT 900 Research in New Testament. Individual 
research under faculty supervision in a particular area 
of New Testament studies. (1-3) 
NT 901 Thesis. The thesis, when chosen instead of an 
extended research paper in the Master of Arts degree, 
will be written according to guidelines available from 
the Seminary office. The student may choose to defend 
the thesis in an oral exam or make a presentation to a 
select audience. (6) 
NT 902 Thesis Re-Registration. Students not completing 
the thesis during the semester in which they register 
for it are required to re-register under the 902 course 
number each semester until the thesis is completed and 
approved. (0) 
NT 905 Biblical Studies Comprehensive Exam. An 
independent study based on a prescribed bibliography 
of important books in biblical studies.  In the exam, 
students will be required to demonstrate the ability to 
perform exegesis based on original language study 
(Greek and Hebrew), including the ability to translate a 
passage.  Students must understand, apply, evaluate 
methods of biblical scholarship, and understand the 
formation and context of the biblical text. Same as BI 
905 and OT 905. (3) 
NTG 432 Exegesis of the Gospels. An exegetical study of 
one or more of the gospels with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, the literary 
relationships between the gospels, and contemporary 
significance. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek 
proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 434 Exegesis of the Book of Acts. An exegetical 
study of the Book of Acts with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. Hermeneutical questions concerning how 
Acts relates to the contemporary church will also be 
addressed. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek proficiency 
is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 435 Exegesis of the Pauline Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the Pauline epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. NT 611 Greek 
Exegesis or Greek proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 438 Exegesis of the General Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the general epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. NT 611 Greek 
Exegesis or Greek proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 439 Exegesis of Revelation. An exegetical study of 
the Book of Revelation with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek 
proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 632 Exegesis of the Gospels. An exegetical study of 
one or more of the gospels with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, the literary 
relationships between the gospels, and contemporary 
significance. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek 
proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 634 Exegesis of the Book of Acts. An exegetical 
study of the Book of Acts with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance.  Hermeneutical questions concerning how 
Acts relates to the contemporary church will also be 
addressed. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek proficiency 
is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 635 Exegesis of the Pauline Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the Pauline epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. NT 611 Greek 
Exegesis or Greek proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 638 Exegesis of the General Epistles. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the general epistles with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. NT 611 Greek 
Exegesis or Greek proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
NTG 639 Exegesis of Revelation. An exegetical study of 
the Book of Revelation with attention to issues of 
genre, social and historical contexts, and contemporary 
significance. NT 611 Greek Exegesis or Greek 
proficiency is a prerequisite. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
39 
Organizational Leadership 
OL 601 Visions, Values, and Voices in Organizational 
Leadership. An introduction to key leadership theories 
(visions) from various worldview perspectives (voices) 
compared and contrasted with Biblically- based values 
that guide organizational leadership. (3) 
OL 602 Authentic Leadership in Organizational 
Contexts. A study of authentic leadership, including 
personal and spiritual factors leading to team 
empowerment and organizational effectiveness. (3) 
OL 603 Foundations for Organizational Leadership.  
A study of theological themes and lessons from history 
on how leadership has been expressed in a variety of 
settings, providing a foundation for developing a 
Biblically-based servant leadership model for 
organizations. (3) 
OL 604 Organizational Leadership Development.  
An introduction to leadership development with a 
focus on mentoring and coaching in developing 
effective leaders. (3) 
OL 605 Cultural Expressions of Organizational 
Leadership. A social, cultural, and contextual analysis of 
various leadership expressions with a view toward 
transformative leadership. (3) 
OL 606 Strategic Organizational Leadership. An analysis 
of strategic thinking and planning from initial vision to 
implementation and evaluation of strategy. (3) 
OL 607 Interpersonal Leadership for Organizational 
Effectiveness. An analysis of interpersonal dynamics for 
effective leadership behavior, including 
communication, group process, and team-building 
consensus development. (3) 
OL 608 Dynamics of Change and Conflict in 
Organizational Leadership. A look at how to lead 
organizational change, while transforming inevitable 
organizational conflicts. (3) 
OL 609 Legal and Ethical Issues in Organizational 
Leadership. An introduction to the legal and ethical 
environment (both personal and corporate) of 
organizations. (3) 
                                                      
2 OT courses are English language based, OTH courses are 
Hebrew language based. 
OL 699 Special Topics in Organizational Leadership. 
With the permission of the program director, students 
may choose one or more topics for special study in the 
area of organizational leadership. (1-6) 
OL 700 Capstone Project in Organizational Leadership. 
A summative, integrative, supervised experience for the 
entire program, including theological and personal 
reflection, as well as practical application 
contextualized to one’s organizational setting. The 
capstone project addresses all five program objectives 
and is summarized in a 25-30-page report. (3) 
Old Testament2 
OT 139 Old Testament I. An overview of Old Testament 
history, literature, and theology from creation to the time 
of King Solomon (Genesis-1 Kings 12), including a brief 
study of wisdom literature. (3) 
OT 212 Survey of the Old Testament. An introduction to 
the history, content, theology, and rhetoric of the Old 
Testament, encouraging students to embrace its teaching 
as part of the Christian Bible. (3) 
OT 310 Hebrew Basics. An introduction to the basics of 
the Hebrew language, with focus on using the language 
in a ministry setting. In using examples from the 
Hebrew Old Testament, the course is designed to 
prepare students to use the basics of the language (e.g., 
grammar, syntax, the meaning of words, etc.) in 
interpreting Scripture. OT 611 is a continuation of this 
course. (Proficiency available) (3) 
OT 311 Hebrew Exegesis. By building on OT 310, this 
course will emphasize using the Hebrew Old 
Testament in the exegetical (interpretative) process. 
Students will develop a method for using the Hebrew 
text, English translations, and other appropriate tools to 
understand the context, grammar, syntax, word 
meanings, theology, and contemporary meaning of Old 
Testament texts. Attention will be given to how to use 
the Old Testament in preaching and teaching. Hebrew 
proficiency or OT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
OT 337 Old Testament II. An overview of Old Testament 
history, literature, and theology from the division of the 
Israelite nation to the return from Babylonian exile and 
restoration of the Judean state, including a brief study of 
the historical context and content of each of the literary 
prophets (Isaiah-Malachi). (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
40 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
OT 431 Exegesis in the Pentateuch. An exegetical study 
of one or more of the books of the Pentateuch with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 433 Exegesis of Prophetic Literature. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the prophetic books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 438 Exegesis of Hebrew Narrative. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the narrative books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 440 Exegesis of Hebrew Poetry and Wisdom 
Literature. An exegetical study of one or more of the 
poetic or wisdom books of the Old Testament with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 605 Advanced Old Testament Introduction.  
An advanced treatment of the date, authorship, unity, 
historical context, literary characteristics, history of 
interpretation, theology, and canonical context of each 
of the books of the Old Testament. Some consideration 
will also be given to matters of general introduction 
such as text, canon, and historicity of the Old 
Testament in general. (3) 
OT 610 Hebrew Basics. An introduction to the basics of 
the Hebrew language, with focus on using the language 
in a ministry setting. In using examples from the 
Hebrew Old Testament, the course is designed to 
prepare students to use the basics of the language (e.g., 
grammar, syntax, the meaning of words, etc.) in 
interpreting Scripture. OT 611 is a continuation of this 
course. (Proficiency available) (3) 
OT 611 Hebrew Exegesis. By building on OT 610, this 
course will emphasize using the Hebrew Old 
Testament in the exegetical (interpretative) process. 
Students will develop a method for using the Hebrew 
text, English translations, and other appropriate tools to 
understand the context, grammar, syntax, word 
meanings, theology, and contemporary meaning of Old 
Testament texts. Attention will be given to how to use 
the Old Testament in preaching and teaching. Hebrew 
proficiency or OT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
OT 702 New Testament Use of the Old Testament.  
An examination of New Testament quotations of the 
Old Testament in order to understand the New 
Testament’s exegetical and hermeneutical 
methodology. Greek and Hebrew proficiency are 
prerequisites. Same as NT 702. (3) 
OT 723 Advanced Hebrew Grammar. Study of 
Advanced Hebrew Grammar with focus on syntax and 
reading of more difficult Old Testament texts and 
extra-Biblical texts from Qumran and other sources. 
OT 611 is a prerequisite. (3) 
OT 725 Aramaic. Study of Aramaic including Old 
Testament, Inscriptional Aramaic, Qumranic, and 
Targumic Aramaic. Same as NT 725. Hebrew 
proficiency or OT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
OT 728 Septuagint. A study of the Greek version of the 
Old Testament and the Apocrypha, including its origin, 
transmission, and significance. Same as NT 728. Greek 
proficiency or NT 610 is a prerequisite. (3) 
OT 731 Exegesis in the Pentateuch. An exegetical study 
of one or more of the books of the Pentateuch with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 733 Exegesis of Prophetic Literature. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the prophetic books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 738 Exegesis of Hebrew Narrative. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the narrative books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 740 Exegesis of Hebrew Poetry and Wisdom 
Literature. An exegetical study of one or more of the 
poetic or wisdom books of the Old Testament with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. (3) 
OT 741 Second Temple Judaism. A study of the history 
and literature of the Intertestamental Period with 
particular emphasis given to connections between the 
Old and New Testaments as well as to developments 
which aid in the understanding of the writings of the 
New Testament. Students will be familiarized with 
political, social, and cultural issues related to 
understanding this historical period through the use of 
primary and secondary readings and through a focused 
and guided research project. Same as NT 741. (3) 
OT 752 Preaching from the Old Testament. A team- 
taught course designed to provide the student with the 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
41 
skills to interpret and preach responsibly from the books 
of the Old Testament. Same as PR 652. (3) 
OT 754 Text and Canon of the Bible. An examination of 
the historical, theological, and textual factors involved in 
the development of the biblical canon, covering both 
what became the Old and New Testaments and what did 
not. Same as NT 754. (3) 
OT 808 Old Testament Theology. An advanced 
investigation of the theological ideas present in the 
books of the Old Testament in terms of their 
distinctiveness and complex unity and in their 
relationship to the New Testament. The course will 
include consideration of the history of discipline since 
the time of Gabler to the present and the issues fueling 
the current debate. A focus on canonical approaches will 
be central to the discussions. (3) 
OT 899 Special Issues in Old Testament. Specialized 
study of an area of Old Testament not covered in 
existing courses. (3) 
OT 900 Research in Old Testament. Individual research 
under faculty supervision in a particular area of Old 
Testament studies. (1-3) 
OT 901 Thesis. The thesis, when chosen instead of an 
extended research paper in the Master of Arts degree, 
will be written according to guidelines available from 
the Seminary office. The student may choose to defend 
the thesis in an oral exam or make a presentation to a 
select audience. (6) 
OT 902 Thesis Re-Registration. Students not completing 
the thesis during the semester in which they register for 
it are required to re-register under the 902 course number 
each semester until the thesis is completed and approved. 
(0) 
OT 905 Biblical Studies Comprehensive Exam. An 
independent study based on a prescribed bibliography 
of important books in biblical studies.  In the exam, 
students will be required to demonstrate the ability to 
perform exegesis based on original language study 
(Greek and Hebrew), including the ability to translate a 
passage.  Students must understand, apply, evaluate 
methods of biblical scholarship, and understand the 
formation and context of the biblical text. Same as BI 
905 and NT 905. (3) 
OTH 431 Exegesis in the Pentateuch. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the books of the Pentateuch 
with attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 611 
Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 433 Exegesis of Prophetic Literature. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the prophetic books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 
611 Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 438 Exegesis of Hebrew Narrative. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the narrative books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 
611 Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 440 Exegesis of Hebrew Poetry and Wisdom 
Literature. An exegetical study of one or more of the 
poetic or wisdom books of the Old Testament with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 611 
Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 731 Exegesis in the Pentateuch. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the books of the Pentateuch 
with attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 611 
Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 733 Exegesis of Prophetic Literature. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the prophetic books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 
611 Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 738 Exegesis of Hebrew Narrative. An exegetical 
study of one or more of the narrative books of the Old 
Testament with attention to issues of genre, social and 
historical contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 
611 Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
OTH 740 Exegesis of Hebrew Poetry and Wisdom 
Literature. An exegetical study of one or more of the 
poetic or wisdom books of the Old Testament with 
attention to issues of genre, social and historical 
contexts, and contemporary significance. OT 611 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
42 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
Hebrew Exegesis or Hebrew proficiency is a 
prerequisite. (3) 
Philosophy 
PH 602 Ancient Philosophy. A tutorial-style course in 
which the student will read and come to understand 
the primary texts and the central questions in the 
ancient western (largely Greek) philosophical tradition. 
Readings will include (but are not limited to) selected 
works of Plato and Aristotle. (3) 
PH 603 Medieval Philosophy. A tutorial-style course in 
which the student will read and come to understand 
the primary texts and the central questions in the 
medieval western (largely Christian) philosophical 
tradition. Readings will include (but are not limited to) 
selected works of Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. (3) 
PH 604 Christianity and the Philosophy of Religion. An 
examination of the truth-claims of Christianity in the 
context of religious skepticism and competing 
worldviews. Topics include the rationality of Christian 
faith; classical arguments for God’s existence; the 
impact of science; the problem of evil; the identity of 
Christ; miracles and the resurrection of Christ; and the 
nature of Scripture. (3) 
PH 605 Science, Theology, and Philosophy.  
An analysis of the connections between science, 
theology, and philosophy. Consideration is given to the 
philosophy of science, the relationship between science 
and religion, different paradigms of biblical 
interpretation, and various mega-issues of cosmology 
(e.g. the big bang, the anthropic principle, the age of 
the universe) and biology (e.g. chemical and biological 
evolution). Attention is also given to historical and 
conceptual issues involving creationism, evolutionism, 
and Intelligent Design. Same as TH 605. (3) 
PH 610 Kierkegaard. An examination of the life, 
thought and writings of the nineteenth century Danish 
philosopher/theologian/ author Soren Kierkegaard 
within the philosophical, theological, social and literary 
contexts of nineteenth century Europe and Golden Age 
Denmark with an eye toward his impact and relevance 
for Christians today. Same as TH 610. (3) 
PH 701 Modern Philosophy. A tutorial-style course in 
which the student will read and come to understand 
the primary texts and the central questions in the 
modern philosophical tradition. Readings may include 
(but are not limited to) the works of Descartes, Spinoza, 
Locke, Hume, Kant, Hegel, and Nietzsche. (3) 
PH 702 Contemporary Philosophy. A tutorial-style 
course in which the student will read and come to 
understand the primary texts and the central questions 
in philosophy in the 20th century. Readings may 
include (but are not limited to) works by Peirce, 
Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Wittgenstein, Searle, 
Levinas, Derrida, and Deleuze. (3) 
PH 714 Metaphysics and Epistemology. This course 
examines the basic issues and major positions in the 
fields of metaphysics which asks about the nature of 
reality, of being, of the world and epistemology which 
asks how we come to know what is real, what is true. 
(3) 
PH 838 Thomas Aquinas. A seminar on the theology of 
the medieval theologian Thomas Aquinas. The class 
will study his writings, theology, and relevance for 
current theological reflection and Christian conviction. 
Same as TH 838. (3) 
PH 899 Special Issues in Philosophy. Specialized study 
of an area of philosophy not covered in existing 
courses. (3) 
PH 900 Research in Philosophy. Individual research 
under faculty supervision in a particular area of 
philosophy. (1-3) 
PH 901 Thesis. The thesis, when chosen instead of an 
extended research paper in the Master of Arts degree, 
will be written according to guidelines available from 
the Seminary office. The student may choose to defend 
the thesis in an oral exam or make a presentation to a 
select audience. (6) 
PH 902 Thesis Re-Registration. Students not completing 
the thesis during the semester in which they register 
for it are required to re-register under the 902 course 
number each semester until the thesis is completed and 
approved. (0) 
PH 905 Comprehensive Exam.  In this examination, 
students will show their progress in the degree 
objectives as appropriate for master’s level study. (0) 
Preaching 
PR 301 Shaping Factors in Ministry. Every culture has 
been formed by several shaping factors. We are always 
in the process of both having been formed by past 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
43 
events, and being formed by present factors. In order to 
respond to the future, we must know and understand 
this process. The class will explore factors that shape a 
local church. The factors to be examined are mindsets, 
history (national and local), setting (urban and rural), 
and culture (habits, beliefs, values and attitude). (3) 
PR 308 Homiletics. A course providing the theological 
basis for preaching and the basic techniques necessary 
for sermon construction and delivery. Prerequisite: LA 
113. (3) 
PR 310 Expository Preaching. A course providing the 
resources necessary for accurate and relevant expository 
preaching, including the interpretation of Biblical 
passages from the various genres of Scripture. 
Prerequisite: PR 308. (3) 
PR 318 Rural and Small Town Ministry. An introduction 
to ministry in the rural and small-town context, 
including an exploration of the traditional rural culture 
and the developing “rurban” culture. The nature of 
pastoral, evangelistic, and leadership ministry is 
examined in light of recent demographic changes. (2) 
PR 320 The Preacher’s Inner Life. An examination of the 
theological basis, unique challenges, and practical helps 
for the life-long spiritual growth of the preacher. The 
course is not a “how-to” course, but rather a course 
shaped around an exegetical study of Mark’s Gospel with 
an emphasis placed on Jesus’ inner life. Special emphasis 
is also placed on the preacher’s reading. (3) 
PR 330 Crucial Issues in Ministry. A discussion of crucial 
issues in pastoral ministry. Topics to be covered include, 
technology, budgets, taxes, leadership, etc. (3) 
PR 400 Orientation to Internship. An introduction to and 
preparation for the internship experience and life- 
related skills for all juniors two semesters prior to the 
planned internship. (0) 
PR 401 Internship in Preaching. A senior-level 
supervised internship experience with an approved 
mentor in an approved setting, within the student’s 
degree program or focus, evaluated according to the 
requirements in individually written learning covenants. 
Internship can range from 1-6 hours and may be 
repeated for a maximum of 6 hours. Prerequisite: PR 400 
Orientation to Internship. (1-6)  
PR 415 Advanced Preaching. This course is designed to 
sharpen the student’s ability to develop and deliver a 
sermon. Attention will be given to evaluating personal 
style. Prerequisite: PR 308. (3) 
PR 601 Preparing to Preach. A course designed to 
provide the student with the skills necessary to preach 
relevant, biblical sermons. Attention is given to 
homiletical method, biblical and theological content, 
the contemporary context, and creative methodology. 
A specialized study of the contemporary context of 
preaching. Students will examine contemporary 
thinking, current preachers and possible approaches to 
preaching to the contemporary listener. (3) 
PR 602 Preaching for Contemporary Listeners.  
A specialized study of the contemporary context of 
preaching. Students will examine contemporary 
thinking, current preachers, and possible approaches to 
preaching to the contemporary listener. (3) 
PR 603 History of Preaching. A general survey of the 
history of preaching, giving special attention to the 
theological trends, movements, and significant 
personalities in the preaching tradition from the 
prophets to the present. (3) 
PR 604 Creative Biblical Preaching. A course for those 
who have previously studied in the field of homiletics. 
The previous experiences of the students will 
determine the areas of homiletical thought given 
attention. Special attention will be given to creative 
forms and delivery. (3) 
PR 650 Preaching from the New Testament. A team- 
taught course designed to provide the student with the 
skills to interpret and preach responsibly from the 
books of the New Testament. Greek proficiency or NT 
610 is prerequisite; PR 601 is also a prerequisite unless 
special permission is granted by the instructor. Same as 
NT 650. (3) 
PR 652 Preaching from the Old Testament. A team- 
taught course designed to provide the student with the 
skills to interpret and preach responsibly from the 
books of the Old Testament. Same as OT 752. (3) 
PR 660 Leading from the Pulpit. This course explores 
how to develop a preaching plan that uses biblical 
proclamation to lead the congregation in accomplishing 
the church’s stated mission, vision, core values, and 
specific goals. We examine compelling reasons for 
planning our preaching, and we utilize various types of 
sermons in our plan, including expository, doctrinal, 
evangelistic, apologetic, ethical, biographical, pastoral, 
narrative, and sermons for special occasions. (3) 
PR 661 Preaching and Pastoral Ministry. A course 
examining the relationship of the pulpit to the life of 
the church. Issues of preaching as vision casting, 
leadership development, shepherding, counseling, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
44 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
discipleship, evangelism, stewardship, etc., will be 
addressed. The relationship of planned preaching to the 
strategy of the church will be discussed. (3) 
PR 750 Theology and Preaching. An examination of the 
theology of preaching found in Scripture.  Attention 
will be given to the impact one’s theological 
perspective has on the outcome of the sermon. The 
course will include an evaluation of contemporary 
preaching methods and their underlying theology. (3) 
PR 751 Preaching and Literary Genre. A study of the 
hermeneutical and homiletical principles involved in 
preaching a specific biblical literary genre. In any given 
semester the genre studied might be: narrative, 
prophesy, poetry, Gospels, epistles, parables, 
apocalyptic, etc. (3) 
PR 752 Preaching in the Bible. A survey of what the 
Bible says about preaching. Particular attention will be 
given to the study of the Biblical vocabulary, Biblical 
sermons, and their implications for the preaching 
process. (3) 
PR 898 Readings in Homiletic Literature. A seminar 
offering the opportunity for the student to read and 
discuss contemporary homiletic literature. (3) 
PR 899 Special Issues in Preaching. Specialized study of 
an area of preaching not covered in existing courses. (3) 
PR 900 Research in Preaching. Individual research 
under faculty supervision in a particular area of 
preaching. (1-3) 
Science 
SC 112 Nutrition and Wellness. This course provides an 
introduction to the basic principles of nutrition and 
wellness with an emphasis on the utilization of nutrients 
for growth and health throughout life.  Topics include 
the role culture plays in food choices, the relationship 
between nutrition and disease, and the tools used for 
nutrition assessment. (3) 
SC 150 Human Biology (Lecture only). An introduction 
to basic principles of biology, focused on humans as 
biological creatures. Topics include cell and tissue 
structure, human structure and function, human 
genetics and heredity, molecular biology and its uses in 
biotechnology, evolution and the origin of life, and 
ecology and the impact of humans on the environment. 
Students will develop skills in data analysis and the use 
of data in decision making through examination of 
contemporary issues. IAI Code L1 904. (3) 
SC 151 Human Biology (Lecture and Lab). A 4 credit 
combined lecture and laboratory course providing an 
introduction to basic principles of biology, focused on 
humans as biological creatures. Topics include cell and 
tissue structure, human structure and function, human 
genetics and hereditary, molecular biology and its uses 
in biotechnology, evolution and origin of life, and 
ecology and the impact of humans on the environment. 
Students will develop skills in data analysis and the use 
of data in decision making though examination of 
contemporary issues. (4) 
SC 155 Animal Biology (Lecture only). A survey of how 
organisms carry out the biological processes necessary 
for life with emphasis on the challenges faced in 
different environments and how organisms are designed 
to meet these challenges. The development of scientific 
ideas and current issues in biology will also be discussed. 
IAI Code L1 902. (3) 
SC 157 Chemistry and Society (Lecture only).  A survey 
of major concepts in inorganic and organic chemistry 
with emphasis on how these concepts apply to daily life. 
Topics include electrochemistry, thermodynamics, 
nuclear chemistry, and other subjects of interest.  The 
development of scientific ideas and current issues in 
chemistry will also be discussed. IAI Code P1 902. (3) 
SC 159 Chemistry and Society (Lecture and Lab). A 4 
credit combined lecture and laboratory course providing 
a survey of major concepts in inorganic and organic 
chemistry with emphasis on how these concepts apply to 
daily life. Topics include electrochemistry, 
thermodynamics, nuclear chemistry, and other subjects 
of interest.  The development of scientific ideas and 
current issues in chemistry will also be discussed. (4)  
SC 175 Animal Biology (Lecture and Lab). A 4 credit 
combined lecture and laboratory course providing a 
survey of how organisms carry out the biological 
processes necessary for life with emphasis on the 
challenges. The development of scientific ideas and 
current issues in biology will also be discussed. (3) 
SC 241 Weather and Climate. This course explores the 
basic understanding of the processes that produce our 
weather and climate. In addition to studying the 
elements of weather and climate – temperature, 
moisture, pressure, and wind – the course examines the 
causes for day-to-day weather changes, the nature of 
violent storms such as tornadoes and hurricanes, and 
surveys world climatic patterns. A study of air pollution 
and human impact on urban and global climates, as well 
as natural and unnatural causes of climate change are 
also included. (3) 
SC 257 Physical Science. (Lecture only). An introduction 
matter and reactions, the physics of motion and forces, 
sound, astronomy, light, and electricity. IAI Code P9 
900. (3) 
SC 258 Physical Science. (Lecture and Lab). A 4 credit 
combined lecture and laboratory course providing an 
introduction to such matters as the nature of energy, the 
chemistry of matter and reactions, the physics of motion 
and forces, sound, astronomy, light, and electricity. 
Students perform hands on experiments that reinforce 
concepts covered in the lecture portion of the course. (4) 
Spiritual Formation 
SF 601 Introduction to Christian Spirituality.  
Examines the principles, problems, and practices of 
spiritual growth in Christ–personally and corporately, 
with emphasis on the Christian disciplines. Required of 
all majors as their first course. (3) 
SF 602 Theology of Spiritual Formation. Explores what 
Scripture says about itself as a primary instrument of 
spiritual transformation from a biblical worldview. 
Emphasis will be placed on learning to read the Bible 
for transformation rather than information. (3) 
SF 603 Biblical Imagery for Spiritual Formation. Lessons 
learned about silence and solitude from the wilderness 
and journey-talk of Israel, Moses, Elijah, David, John 
the Baptist, Jesus, and examples from the desert 
monastics. (3) 
SF 604 Theology of the Holy Spirit. Looks at Scripture 
and church history through the lens of a biblical 
worldview to evaluate the foundational role that the 
Holy Spirit plays in spiritual formation. (3) 
SF 605 Spiritual Formation Practicum.  
Requires students to practice spiritual formation in a 
personal and corporate setting under the guidance of a 
mature spiritual leader of their choosing, journaling 
their daily practice of Scripture reading, following 
guidelines listed in the syllabus. Offered every summer. 
Students may design their own practicum with 
approval of program director. (3) 
SF 606. Christian Spirituality through Independent 
Study. Each student chooses one or more topics in 
spiritual formation to explore independently through 
supervised assignments, mostly reading and writing. 
Students are responsible for finding a faculty member 
willing to oversee the study with approval of program 
director. Offered every summer. (3) 
SF 607 Readings in Classical and Contemporary 
Christian Spirituality. Reviews both classical literature 
in this field and more contemporary literature from 
multiple faith traditions, with a focus on critiquing the 
readings from a biblical worldview. (3) 
SF 608 Spiritual Direction. Looks at the ancient prayer 
process whereby spiritual directors and their directee 
establish an ongoing conversation about practicing the 
presence of God, with a focus on duplicating this 
practice in the local church. (3) 
SF 609 Theology of Service and Sabbath.  
Patterned upon the spiritual ebb and flow of Luke 5:15-
16, this course examines the complimentary disciplines 
of Christian compassion and wilderness retreat. It also 
examines the holy habit of practicing the presence of 
God within the context of the spiritual anticipation and 
receptivity needed for holistic service. (3) 
SF 610 Prayer Practice and Spiritual Transformation. 
Reviews some prayers from Scripture and how they 
change lives, as well as looks at how a biblical worldview 
prompts a life of prayer and a desire to help others learn 
to pray. (3) 
SF 611 Spiritual Formation Research Project.  
Requires students to research and write a 25-30-page 
paper or publishable article on some aspect of spiritual 
formation, including personal and corporate application. 
The product must demonstrate advanced research skills. 
The project must be completed sometime during the last 
year, usually during the summer. (3) 
SF 612 Spiritual Formation Capstone Retreat.  
Requires all students in their final semester to participate 
corporately in a weekend-long, spiritual formation 
retreat, with the program’s five learning objectives 
serving as a framework. Offered every summer as a 
weekend intensive in a retreat setting. (3) 
Social Sciences 
SS 164 Introduction to Sociology. A study of basic 
sociological concepts and social processes. IAI Code S7 
900. (3) 
SS 171 Principles of Psychology. An introductory course 
designed to acquaint the student with the most 
important principles of behavior and mental life. IAI 
Code S6 900. (3) 
SS 260 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. An 
introduction to the study of culture, studying the 
interrelationships between individuals and societies, and 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
46 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
the natural, ideational, social, economic, legal, temporal, 
and spatial contexts in which they live. The course 
stresses implications of anthropology insights for 
Christian and education professionals. (3) 
SS 261 Principles of Economics. An examination of supply 
and demand, the market structure, inflation, 
unemployment, economic growth and GDP, and 
international trade, as well as current economic issues. (3) 
SS 263 Citizens and Government. An introduction to 
public policy and individual citizen’s roles and 
responsibilities, with a particular focus on the U.S. 
government within the context of a pluralistic society. 
The course actively stimulates students to ponder the 
socially responsible choices that educated citizens who 
participate in shared governance make. (Fulfills state 
requirements for teacher education students regarding 
the study of Government, the Constitution of the United 
States, and the state of Illinois.) IAI Code S5 900. (3) 
SS 268 Non-Western Religions. A survey of the religious 
and cultural ideas and practices of non-Western 
religions, with attention given to Islam, Animism, 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, and 
Shintoism.  IAI Code H5 904N. (3) 
SS 335 Marriage and the Family. This course examines 
the formation, maintenance, and dissolution of 
marriages and families, including the Biblical principles 
used in ministry to families. (3)  
SS 349 Lifespan Developmental Psychology.  
An investigation of the growth and development of 
persons, examining the developmental theories of 
Erikson, Piaget, Kohlberg, and others from a Christian 
perspective. Same as PS 349. Prerequisite: SS 171.  IAI 
Code S6 902. (3) 
Theology 
TH 160 Introduction to Christian Theology. An 
introduction to the key Biblical beliefs that define the 
historic Christian faith (e.g. God, Christ, Holy Spirit, 
humanity, sin, salvation, etc.) with attention given to the 
credibility of such beliefs. (3) 
TH 318 Wisdom from the Ancient Church. This course 
examines spiritual progress as understood by important 
authors and traditions in the Early Church. In particular, 
we will examine prominent ways of reading Scripture, of 
understand ng and fostering personal and moral 
development, and of deepening the practice of prayer in 
the Christian’s life. (3) 
TH 326 Augustine. A seminar style reading and 
discussion based course centered around the life and 
works of St. Augustine of Hippo. A broad survey of 
Augustine’s thought and life will be followed by a 
careful reading through specific texts, such as 
Confessions, City of God, On the Trinity, or selected 
sermons and letters. (3) 
TH 327 Lewis, Tolkien, and the Theological 
Imagination. A seminar style, reading and discussion-
based course, giving students the chance to explore the 
broader corpus of either C.S. Lewis or J.R.R. Tolkien 
(focus varies by year). The class will engage the 
writings of one of these authors with attention paid to 
worldview, philosophical, theological, and literary 
issues. (3) 
TH 338 Thomas Aquinas. A seminar on the theology of 
the medieval theologian Thomas Aquinas. The class will 
study his writings, theology, and relevance for current 
theological reflection and Christian conviction. Same as 
PH 338. (3) 
TH 343 Philosophy of Science. This course examines the 
philosophical presuppositions inherent in science while 
chronicling the history and debate around those 
presuppositions. Key themes will likely include the 
epistemological question of how we can know anything at 
all, the nature of time and space, the Quantum 
revolution, the relationship between science, ethics, and 
religion, and key figures responsible for paradigm shifts in 
the history of science (e.g., Aristotle, Copernicus, Bacon, 
Newton, Faraday, Darwin, Einstein). (3) 
TH 363 Pauline Theology. A comprehensive analysis of 
key topics arising from the Pauline literature, with 
emphasis on a systematic understanding of Paul’s 
theology. (3) 
TH 368 Introduction to Mythology. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring mythology 
from a variety of primarily, though not exclusively, 
Western cultures (e.g., Greek, Norse, Egyptian, 
Arthurian) while also providing a Christian perspective 
on the importance of the mythological imagination as 
well as the role and genre of “true myths.” (3) 
TH 399 Special Issues in Theology. A focused faculty-
guided study of a given period in the history of theology, 
a specific thinker, or a prominent contemporary issue 
like open theism, inclusivism/exclusivism, the nature of 
Scripture, sexual identity, the historicity of Adam and 
Eve, etc. May be repeated. (1-3)  
TH 406 History of Christian Spirituality. This course will 
examine the spiritual traditions present in the early, 
medieval, early modern (Reformation and Counter-
Reformation), and contemporary Church. Attention will 
be paid to the history of Christian worship along with 
primary source engagements with great spiritual authors 
from each of these ages. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
47 
TH 408 Baptism and the Lord’s Supper in the Early 
Church. A study of the development of the theology and 
practice of baptism and the Lord’s Supper from the 
beginning of the church through the 5th century.  
Studies will investigate major events, documents, 
developments, and controversies by reading primary 
source material from the patristic period pertaining to 
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. (3) 
TH 416 Systematic Theology. A study of Christian 
systematic theology, seeking to understand the meaning 
and relations of Christian doctrines with attention to the 
controversies about, and the inner unity of, the Christian 
faith. Junior or senior standing required. (3) 
TH 437 Race, Gender, and Evangelicalism. A seminar 
style, reading and discussion based course probing the 
explosive history and relationship between Evangelicals, 
gender, and race, particularly – though not exclusively – 
with the United States.  Students will be equipped with a 
broader historical, biblical, philosophical, and 
theological framework upon which to draw when 
engaging with culture and the church regarding these 
sensitive topics. (3) 
TH 440 Women’s Spiritual Writings. A seminar style, 
readings and discussion based class highlighting seminal 
female texts in the Christian tradition. Author rotations 
will likely include, but not be limited to, Julian of 
Norwich, Margery Kempe, Hildegard of Bingen, 
Catherine of Siena, Theresa of Avila, Susanna Wesley, 
Margaret Fell, Hannah More, Catherine Booth, 
Josephine Butler, Phoebe Palmer, Octavia Albert, 
Dorothy Day, and Maya Angelou. (3) 
TH 456 New Age Thought and Practice. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course tracing the roots of 
New Age thought in Western Esotericism, Theosophy, 
and Spiritualism through to the explosion of New Age 
spirituality in the 1960s and 70s, with special reference 
to its on-going influence on contemporary culture. In 
addition to standard readings, the course materials will 
incorporate a variety of mediums, especially films and 
novels. (3) 
TH 462 Plato. A seminar style, reading and discussion 
based course primarily engaging with the Dialogues of 
Plato, with some brief interludes to relevant historical 
episodes (e.g., Neoplatonism, Augustine, the 
Renaissance, Cambridge Platonism). (3) 
TH 466 Christology. “Who is Jesus Christ?” is the central 
question of the world’s and each person’s history. This 
class will study the Church’s past and present 
understandings of the Person of the Christ. It will do so 
through an examination of 1) Scripture, 2) key points in 
the Church’s history, and 3) the affirmation and worship 
of Jesus in the world’s various cultures today. (3) 
TH 469 History of Christian Theology I. An historical 
introduction to the relevant primary sources, examining 
the most important persons, issues, and events in the 
history of theology from the Apostolic Fathers to the 
Eve of the Reformation. (3) 
TH 470 History of Christian Theology II. An historical 
introduction to the relevant primary sources, examining 
the most important persons, issues, and events in the 
history of theology from the Reformation to 19th 
century theological thought. (3) 
TH 475 Eschatology. A survey of exegetical, historical, 
hermeneutical, and theological perspectives as these 
relate to the Biblical doctrine of the “Last Things.” (3) 
TH 476 Contemporary Theological Issues. An introduction 
to key issues that are currently dominating the 
contemporary theological scene. Students will examine 
the writings of leading theologians with two aims in 
mind: (1) to engage these theological proposals in a 
constructive, critical and Biblically- reflective manner; 
and (2) to appreciate and address the “challenge” that 
these theologies bring to the contemporary evangelical 
church. Current topics include open theism, 
pluralism/inclusivism, and the possibility of truth. (3) 
TH 477 Religion and Fiction.  A seminar style course built 
around reading multiple works of fiction in their entirety 
and discussing them together at length. Text selection 
will vary from year to year, though regular authors would 
include the likes of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Graham Greene, 
Flannery O’Connor, G.K Chesterton, George MacDonald, 
Shusaku Endo, and Marilynne Robinson. (3) 
TH 482 Ethics. A survey and critical examination of 
various historical and systematic approaches to ethics. 
Attention is also given to representative contemporary 
moral issues. (3) 
TH 496 Seminar on Charles Taylor. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring the 
thought of Catholic philosopher Charles Taylor.  Each 
iteration of the course will involve an in-depth reading 
and analysis of one to two primary works, such as A 
Secular Age, Sources of the Self, or The Malaise of 
Modernity. (3) 
TH 501 Practice in Spiritual Formation. A course in which 
students both study and engage in the formative Christian 
practices of reading Scripture and praying.  This course is 
intended to be repeated up to 3 hours total credit. (1) 
TH 600 Systematic Theology. A graduate study of 
systematic theology, seeking to understand the bases, 
meanings, and relations of Christian doctrines, with 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
48 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
attention to the controversies about and inner unity of 
the Christian faith. (3) 
TH 606 Ethics. A survey and critical examination of 
various historical and systematic approaches to ethics. 
Attention is also given to representative contemporary 
moral issues. (3) 
TH 607 Christology. An examination of the biblical, 
historical, and cultural issues that have contributed to the 
Church’s past and present understandings of the Person 
and Work of Christ. Special attention will be given to 
recent approaches to historical Jesus study. (3) 
TH 609. Doctrine of the Holy Spirit. An examination of 
the biblical, historical and cultural issues that have 
contributed to the Church’s past and present 
understandings of the Person and Work of the Holy 
Spirit. Special attention will be given to contemporary 
evangelical debates over the Spirit’s work among 
Christians today. (3) 
TH 610 Kierkegaard. An examination of the life, thought 
and writings of the nineteenth century Danish 
philosopher/theologian/ author Soren Kierkegaard 
within the philosophical, theological, social and literary 
contexts of nineteenth century Europe and Golden Age 
Denmark with an eye toward his impact and relevance 
for Christians today. Same as PH 610. (3) 
TH 613 Global Christianity. This course will engage 
students with the global character of the Church as 
well as ministry in the multifaith and multicultural 
context of contemporary society. This will include 
attention to the wide diversity of religious traditions 
present in potential ministry settings, as well as 
expressions of social justice and respect congruent with 
Christian commitment. Same as IC 613. (3) 
TH 618 Wisdom from the Ancient Church. This course 
examines spiritual progress as understood by important 
authors and traditions in the Early Church. In particular, 
we will examine prominent ways of reading Scripture, of 
understanding and fostering personal and moral 
development, and of deepening the practice of prayer in 
the Christian’s life. (3) 
TH 626 Augustine. A seminar style reading and 
discussion based course centered around the life and 
works of St. Augustine of Hippo. A broad survey of 
Augustine’s thought and life will be followed by a 
careful reading through specific texts, such as 
Confessions, City of God, On the Trinity, or selected 
sermons and letters. (3) 
TH 627 Lewis, Tolkien, and the Theological 
Imagination. A seminar style, reading and discussion-
based course, giving students the chance to explore the 
broader corpus of either C.S. Lewis or J.R.R. Tolkien 
(focus varies by year). The class will engage the 
writings of one of these authors with attention paid to 
worldview, philosophical, theological, and literary 
issues. (3) 
TH 637 Race, Gender, and Evangelicalism. A seminar 
style, reading and discussion based course probing the 
explosive history and relationship between Evangelicals, 
gender, and race, particularly – though not exclusively – 
with the United States.  Students will be equipped with a 
broader historical, biblical, philosophical, and 
theological framework upon which to draw when 
engaging with culture and the church regarding these 
sensitive topics. (3) 
TH 640 Women’s Spiritual Writings. A seminar style, 
readings and discussion based class highlighting seminal 
female texts in the Christian tradition. Author rotations 
will likely include, but not be limited to, Julian of 
Norwich, Margery Kempe, Hildegard of Bingen, 
Catherine of Siena, Theresa of Avila, Susanna Wesley, 
Margaret Fell, Hannah More, Catherine Booth, 
Josephine Butler, Phoebe Palmer, Octavia Albert, 
Dorothy Day, and Maya Angelou. (3) 
TH 643 Philosophy of Science. This course examines the 
philosophical presuppositions inherent in science while 
chronicling the history and debate around those 
presuppositions. Key themes will likely include the 
epistemological question of how we can know anything at 
all, the nature of time and space, the Quantum 
revolution, the relationship between science, ethics, and 
religion, and key figures responsible for paradigm shifts in 
the history of science (e.g., Aristotle, Copernicus, Bacon, 
Newton, Faraday, Darwin, Einstein). (3) 
TH 656 New Age Thought and Practice. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course tracing the roots of 
New Age thought in Western Esotericism, Theosophy, 
and Spiritualism through to the explosion of New Age 
spirituality in the 1960s and 70s, with special reference 
to its on-going influence on contemporary culture. In 
addition to standard readings, the course materials will 
incorporate a variety of mediums, especially films and 
novels. (3) 
TH 662 Plato. A seminar style, reading and discussion 
based course primarily engaging with the Dialogues of 
Plato, with some brief interludes to relevant historical 
episodes (e.g., Neoplatonism, Augustine, the 
Renaissance, Cambridge Platonism). (3) 
TH 668 Introduction to Mythology. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring mythology 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
49 
from a variety of primarily, though not exclusively, 
Western cultures (e.g., Greek, Norse, Egyptian, 
Arthurian) while also providing a Christian perspective 
on the importance of the mythological imagination as 
well as the role and genre of “true myths.” (3) 
TH 677 Religion and Fiction.  A seminar style course built 
around reading multiple works of fiction in their entirety 
and discussing them together at length. Text selection 
will vary from year to year, though regular authors would 
include the likes of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Graham Greene, 
Flannery O’Connor, G.K Chesterton, George MacDonald, 
Shusaku Endo, and Marilynne Robinson. (3) 
TH 694 Theology and Film. A study of theology as 
mediated by cinema. Students will learn the basic 
elements of film-making in order to better understand 
how films communicate meaning, and explore 
theological themes as communicated through this 
medium. (3) 
TH 696 Seminar on Charles Taylor. A seminar style, 
reading and discussion based course exploring the 
thought of Catholic philosopher Charles Taylor.  Each 
iteration of the course will involve an in-depth reading 
and analysis of one to two primary works, such as A 
Secular Age, Sources of the Self, or The Malaise of 
Modernity. (3) 
TH 701 Modern Theology I. A study of the unfolding 
trajectory of theological reflection in the modern 
world- specifically covering the period of the emerging 
modern world through the nineteenth century. 
Examined are such thinkers and movements as: the 
Enlightenment, Kant, Schleiermacher, Hegel, Newman, 
Romanticism, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Neo-Thomism, 
and Classical Liberalism. (3) 
TH 702 Modern Theology II. A further study of the 
unfolding trajectory of theological reflection in the 
modern world – specifically covering the period of the 
twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Examined are 
such thinkers and movements as: Barth, Bultmann, 
Tillich, Rahner, Nouvelle Théologie, Liberation 
Theology, Process Theology, and various Postmodern 
Theologies. (3) 
TH 706 History of Christian Spirituality. This course 
will examine the spiritual traditions present in the 
early, medieval, early modern (Reformation and 
Counter-Reformation), and contemporary Church. 
Attention will be paid to the history of Christian 
worship –since much of Christian spirituality is 
corporate – along with primary source engagements 
with great spiritual authors from each of these ages. (3) 
TH 708 Baptism and the Lord’s Supper in the Early 
Church. A study of the development of the theology and 
practice of baptism and the Lord’s Supper from the 
beginning of the church through the 5th century.  
Studies will investigate major events, documents, 
developments, and controversies by reading primary 
source material from the patristic period pertaining to 
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. (3) 
TH 806 History and Theology of Eastern Orthodoxy. An 
investigation of the history and theology of Eastern 
Orthodox Christianity from the beginnings of the 
Church until today. After surveying the history of 
Eastern Orthodox Christianity, studies will focus on 
distinctive theological emphases and practices of 
Eastern Orthodox Churches. (3) 
TH 833 The Trinity. A historical and systematic 
seminar on the central Christian doctrine of the 
Trinity. (3) 
TH 838 Thomas Aquinas. A seminar on the theology of 
the medieval theologian Thomas Aquinas. The class 
will study his writings, theology, and relevance for 
current theological reflection and Christian conviction. 
Same as PH 838. (3) 
TH 865 Maximus the Confessor. A historical and 
systematic seminar on the theology of the seventh- 
century martyr, Maximus the Confessor. The class will 
study his life and writings, historical importance, and 
relevance for current theological reflection. (3) 
TH 899 Special Issues in Systematic and Philosophical 
Theology. Specialized study of an area of Systematic 
and Philosophical Theology not covered in existing 
courses. (3) 
TH 900 Research in Systematic and Philosophical 
Theology. Individual research under faculty supervision 
in a particular area of Systematic and Philosophical 
Theology. (1-3) 
TH 901 Thesis. The thesis, when chosen instead of an 
extended research paper in the Master of Arts degree, 
will be written according to guidelines available from 
the Seminary office. The student may choose to defend 
the thesis in an oral exam or make a presentation to a 
select audience. (6)  
TH 902 Thesis Re-Registration. Students not completing 
the thesis during the semester in which they register 
for it are required to re-register under the 902 course 
number each semester until the thesis is completed and 
approved. (0) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
50 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
TH 905 Comprehensive Exam.  In this examination, 
students will show their progress in the degree 
objectives as appropriate for master’s level study. (0) 
University Studies - Orientation 
US 098 Orientation to LCU. The purpose of this 
orientation course is to provide an overview of online 
learning, an introduction to Canvas, our learning 
management system, as well as additional helps to prepare 
you for success during your educational journey here at 
LCU. This non-credit, one-week course, is a requirement 
for all non-traditional students admitted to Lincoln 
Christian University. Students must pass the online 
orientation within the designated time frame before 
proceeding further in their studies. (0) 
US 399 Extended Studies. Continued registration for 
students completing dual enrollment programs. (Pass/No-
pass) (0) 
US 500 Orientation to LCU. The purpose of this 
orientation course is to provide an overview of online 
learning, an introduction to Canvas, our learning 
management system, as well as additional helps to 
prepare you for success during your educational 
journey here at LCU. This non-credit, one-week 
course, is a requirement for all students admitted to 
Lincoln Christian University. Students must pass the 
online orientation within the designated time frame 
before proceeding further in their studies. (0) 
Worship Studies 
WS 600 Biblical Principles of Worship. A study of the 
biblical foundations of Christian worship and its 
formational value. The student will develop a theology 
of worship and learn to apply these principles to the 
content of Sunday worship and to the worshipping life 
of the congregation. (3) 
WS 602 Music, Art and Media in Worship. A course 
which will aid the student in developing a philosophy 
of the use of the arts in worship. Attention will be 
given to using media and technology to enhance the 
content of corporate worship, as well as to the 
development of necessary musical skills. (3) 
WS 603 Worship in Cultural Context. A study of the 
impact of culture on worship practices. Emphasis is 
placed on the relationship between worship and 
evangelism, and attention is given to choosing 
appropriate styles for a given context without 
sacrificing content. Attention will be given to the 
manner in which various cultures experience God and 
an understanding of spirituality in the 
modern/postmodern context. (Same as IC 630) (3) 
WS 604 Worship and Spiritual Formation. A course 
designed to aid the student in developing an 
understanding of worship as it relates to spiritual 
growth, discipleship, and pastoral care. Attention is 
given to private worship, the impact of baptism on the 
life of the believer, the importance of ritual to 
community and the practice of the Lord’s Supper. 
(Same as CE 607) (3) 
WS 607 Worship in Historical Perspective. A survey of 
the development of Christian worship from the 
beginning of the church to the present day. The 
formational aspects of historical liturgies will be 
discussed. Attention will be given to recovering 
traditions that may be useful for enhancing corporate 
worship in today’s culture. (Same as CH 607) (3) 
WS 701 Creative Design for Corporate Worship.  
This course will aid the student in effectively designing 
Sunday morning worship services, with an emphasis on 
the formative aspects of communal worship. Attention 
will be given to biblical content and structure. Several 
models of worship planning will be examined along with 
appropriate activities for enhancing congregational 
worship. (3) 
WS 702 Communication in Corporate Worship.  
This course is a study of the various types of 
communication in corporate Christian worship. Forms of 
communication involving the senses of sound, sight, taste, 
touch, and smell will be explored. Emphasis is placed on 
the biblical, historical, and theological foundation for 
varied forms of communication. (3) 
WS 704 Worship Leadership as Vocation. This course is 
designed to aid the worship leader in a look at the 
difference between a job and vocation. Through the 
examination of the biblical stories of church leaders as 
well as the contemporary writings of business executives, 
attention will be given to models of leadership both 
inside and outside the church setting. Drawing on 
Philippians 2, the underpinnings of humility, 
transparency, and vulnerability will be emphasized as 
indispensable to the worship leader. With the vast 
majority of ministry taking place outside the gaze of the 
church membership during corporate worship, the 
student in this course will consider how the 
aforementioned foundation informs the work of a 
ministry team. The importance of having difficult 
conversations, leading meetings, and contributing to a 
healthy team will be examined. (3) 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
 
Take a different course. Make a better world. 
51 
WS 705 Foundations for Worship Ministry. Through an 
examination of the biblical, theological, historical, and 
cultural perspectives on worship, this course seeks to help 
the students develop the analytical and practical skills to 
lead in the experiences of worship, giving proper 
attention to content, structure, and style. (3) 
WS 776 Practical and Pastoral Skills for Worship Ministry. 
This course is designed to address the pastoral dimensions 
of worship ministry and to hone musical skills. Individual 
attention will be given in areas of particular concern for 
each student such as conducting, vocal production, 
keyboard skills, arranging, sound production, etc. The 
course meets in an actual church setting and requires 
travel/ housing to a city other than Lincoln. Class sessions 
will include visits to area churches and interaction with 
area music and worship ministers. (3) 
WS 899 Special Issues in Worship Studies.  
Specialized study of an area of Worship Studies not 
covered in existing courses. (1-3) 
WS 900 Research in Worship Studies.  
Individual research under faculty supervision in a 
particular area of Worship Studies. (1-3 hours) 
Youth and Family Ministry 
YM 111 Orienteering for Family Ministry Students. An 
introductory course that will orient family ministry 
students for a journey through either the Children and 
Family Ministry program or the Youth and Family 
Ministry program, to the various ministry vocational 
opportunities available, and to developing a personal 
ministry preparation strategy that includes strengthening 
their character, deepening their relational chemistry, 
improving their competency, and fueling their confidence 
and commitment for a long life in Kingdom service. (0) 
YM 202 Pre-Internship Ministry Experience Required 
(PRIMER). A supervised, six-week long pre-internship 
experience (completed during the school year or summer) 
prior to the junior year (or 65 credit hours) where all 
youth ministry majors gain real ministry experience, are 
assessed, evaluated, and provided feedback on their lives 
and service by a mentor. Students will personally identify 
key areas on which to work over the remaining years of 
college. This can be completed in one to two hours per 
week. (0) 
YM 211 Introduction to Youth Ministry. An overview of 
the theological, philosophical, administrative, and 
practical ministry issues necessary for an effective 
disciple-making youth/student minister. This class will 
lay the foundation for the other Youth Ministry classes 
on which the student will build during the process of 
becoming a complete, fully prepared disciple-making 
youth minister for whatever ministry context God leads 
him or her to enter. Prerequisite: YM 111 or approval of 
program director. (3) 
YM 318 Introduction to Children’s Ministry. This course is 
an overview of various aspects of children’s ministry. The 
foci of the course are on Biblical and theological 
understandings as well as the current cultural issues and 
trends in children’s ministry. The course also explores 
parent styles, parent education, and educational 
communication skills for all children in elementary (K-5) 
level. (3) 
YM 325 Relational Dynamics for Youth Ministry.  
A reflective examination and skill development of 
interdependent dynamics necessary for an effective youth 
and family ministry through increasing self and social 
awareness so as to improve the emotional, social, and 
spiritual health for the leader and all associative 
relationships. Prerequisite: YM 211. (3) 
YM 326 Family Ministry Nuts and Bolts. A creative and 
practical simulation course (the class acts as a real youth 
ministry team) focused on the mastery of intermediate 
youth ministry and practical theological skills and 
competencies (e.g., Biblical study tools, technology, 
creative program creation and development, 
administration of ministry, and personal budgets and 
finances) by developing a complete years’ worth of 
ministry programming (for either children’s or youth 
ministry) through careful hermeneutic and exegetical 
practice. (3) 
YM 330 Crucial Issues in Youth Ministry.  This is a course 
that provides youth ministry networking and the 
philosophical and practical aspects of youth ministry in a 
convention or traveling class setting. Credit can be 
received by participation with an organized Youth 
Ministry program trip or can be used independently for 
another convention if approved by the Youth Ministry 
Professor. There may be a fee added to this course for trip 
costs. (1-3) 
YM 350 Youth Ministry Exegesis – A week-long trip that 
explores and exegetes a variety of youth ministries in a 
variety of youth ministry cultures. Prerequisite: YM 211. 
(3) 
YM 372 Intercultural Youth Ministry. A course designed 
to equip students for long-term children/youth ministry 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
2023-2024 University Catalog 
52 
 
 
www.LincolnChristian.edu 
in urban North American contexts as well as international 
cultural contexts. Holistic ministry models will be 
presented that deal with issues including: family 
breakdown, abuse, gangs, drugs, racism, children of war, 
sex-trafficking, child-labor, street kids, and extreme 
poverty. (3) 
YM 399 Special Issues in Youth Ministries. A focused and 
deeper investigation of one or more special issues that the 
junior or senior student seeks to further explore. Open for 
student-driven issues via small groups or independent 
study. Can be done in more than one class but is limited 
to four credits. (1-4) 
YM 401 Orientation to  Internship. An introduction to 
and preparation for the internship experience and life-
related skills for all juniors two semesters prior to the 
planned internship. (0)  
YM 402 Internship in Family Ministry (Youth or 
Children). A senior level supervised internship experience 
with an approved mentor in an approved setting, within 
the student’s degree program or focus, evaluated 
according to the requirements in individually written 
learning covenants. Internships can range from 1-6 hours 
and may be repeated for a maximum of 6 hours. 
Prerequisite: YM 401 Orientation to Internship. (1-6)  
YM 453 Not-for-Profit Organizations. An examination of 
starting and operating a not-for-profit. Topics include 
strategic planning, program development, volunteers, 
staff and board relations, marketing and public relations, 
budgeting, grantsmanship, major gift programs, special 
events, and direct fundraising. (3) 
YM 480 Mathetes:  Spiritual Formation for Youth 
Ministry. A creative, organic, and experiential senior 
youth ministry course (to be taken during last semester 
on campus) designed to synthesize and integrate all 
that has been learned and to deepen, shape, and equip 
the student in a variety of spiritual formation principles 
and practices, Biblical hermeneutical skills, and 
servant- leadership mindsets so, as an apprentice of 
Jesus, he/she may train apprentices of Jesus for life in 
the Kingdom of God. Prerequisite: YM 325 and YM 
327. (3) 
 
