BIB 1050 Exploring the Bible 
This course provides a survey of the biblical story in its progressive unfolding of the history of 
redemption within the framework of creation, fall, redemption, consummation. Attention is given to the 
literary, historical, cultural, and theological dimensions of Scripture as it offers a metanarrative or 
“worldview-story.” Emphasis is placed on the unity of Scripture as it reaches its fullness and fulfillment 
in Christ, while at the same time recognizing key developments and differences between the various 
chapters of the biblical storyline. Three Hours. 
PSY 1200 Essentials of Behavioral Science 
This introductory course in Behavioral Sciences provides an opportunity to learn about the major 
behavioral science topics, concepts and real life applications. This course will survey multiple topics as 
they relate to relationships. Students will also be encouraged during this course to increase personal 
awareness of how cognitive and emotional factors influence behavior in a variety of social contexts. The 
focus of this course is on improving relationships in many different sectors of life. Three Hours. 
HIS 1050 Current Issues in Historical Context 
This class examines the historical and political development of at least two broad topics that remain part 
of contemporary discussion and illustrates the way the past can help students understand current 
debates and conversations. The topics chosen are meant to represent areas of significant concern for 
understanding current issues and moral questions. The course asks the question, “How did we get 
here?” and provides a foundation for discussions of diversity, citizenship, Christian ethics, and cultural 
awareness. Topics will likely change over time. Three hours. 
First-Year Learning Competencies  
ENG 1100 Effective Writing 
A course designed to help students develop and hone the skills necessary for clear and persuasive 
writing at the college level and beyond. The primary focus of the course is scholarly research and 
writing, with emphasis on finding and evaluating sources, integrating and documenting sources, 
improving writing structure and organization, implementing rhetorical strategies, practicing revision and 
peer workshop, and strengthening writing mechanics. Three Hours. 
 
COM 1100 Public Speaking 
The objective of this course is to provide students with an introduction to the principles of public 
discourse and civic engagement. The focus will be on a practical background in recognizing, analyzing, 
and constructing arguments in the public sphere. Readings, class time, and assignments will focus on the 
skills and concepts necessary for successful application of the principles to a civic engagement project. 
Three Hours. 
 
HUM 2000 Global Perspectives  
The purpose of Global Perspectives is to encounter world cultures through literature and dialogue. In 
this interdisciplinary course, students engage divergent outlooks from around the world, grappling with 
cultural differences and presuppositions. Defining literary works and guest speakers from different 
continents set the stage for literary and cultural discussions. This course cultivates cultural competency, 
provides a framework for understanding God’s heart for the nations, and prepares students for the 
Cross-Cultural Field Experience. Three Hours.  

HUM 2010 Go Encounter Trips 
Students who select the Go Encounter Trip option to fulfill their Cross-Cultural Field Experience (CCFE) 
requirement register for a Go Encounter trip offered by the Grace College Global Initiatives Office.  A Go 
Encounter trip is also worth 2 Applied Learning Credits, which emphasizes “analytic inquiry, active 
learning, real-world problem solving, and innovation,” (Applied Learning Syllabus). Zero Hours. 
HUM 2030 Third Culture/International Student 
A course designed for third culture and international students for whom the United States is a cross-
cultural experience. Students explore some of the assumptions, values and beliefs that characterize the 
United States and compare those with other cultures. They also discover the third culture, as defined by 
Dr. Useem, “created, shared, and learned” by those who are from one culture and are in the process of 
relating to another. Zero hours. 
HUM 2040 CCFE Independent Trips  
Students who select the independent trip option to fulfill their Cross-Cultural Field Experience (CCFE) 
requirement create their own international or domestic field experience in consultation with the Office 
of Global Initiatives.  These experiences must be pre-approved. Any experiences prior to taking HUM 
2000 Global Perspectives will only be accepted if the student has transferred to Grace College. Students 
must complete all work, including a debriefing presentation in the semester immediately following their 
trip. Completion of this Global Debriefing course will grant the student the required CCFE credit and two 
Applied Learning credits. Zero Hours. 
STA 0010-STA 0640 Study Abroad Programs 
Select majors require participation in the Study Abroad program to fulfill their program degree 
requirements. Consult the Institute for Global Studies website for current listings. Twelve to Thirty 
Hours. 
BIB 2010 Scripture and Interpretation 
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and small group Bible 
study leadership. Observational skills of the English text will be developed through hands-on activities 
and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical genres with the goal of 
equipping the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary context. 
Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. Three Hours.  
SCI 2030 Faith, Science, and Reason 
This course is designed to assist the student in (1) demonstrating the scope and magnitude of science 
and mathematics from the 1600’s until today; (2) why we study these subjects; (3) knowing the 
limitations of these subjects; (4) where the Christian fits and operates within the scientific paradigm; 
and (5) how Christians can incorporate their faith and reason within the scientific enterprise and how to 
use it as a productive platform when communicating to those of different worldviews. Three Hours. 
 
 
 
HUM 2100 Creative Arts and Culture 
Through the landscape of cultural history, this course explores the human phenomenon of creativity 
from prehistoric culture to our contemporary urban society. Posing the question “Why creative arts?” 
this course examines how creativity and culture define and reflect each other. Viewed through a global, 
chronological, or thematic approach and in context of time and place, interrelationships of various 
modes of expression are presented for works of art, music, and literature. During the course, students 
are required to select two experiential activities for engaging in creative arts and culture. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, art museums, gallery exhibits, visual and performing arts festivals, 
international/cultural festivals, symphony orchestras, music concerts, theatrical productions, and 
literary events. Grace Core requirement. Three Hours. 
3000-Level Courses 
 
ECN 3000 Consumer Economics 
Consumer Economics is a course designed to prepare students to understand the economic system from 
a Biblical perspective and how it affects individuals as consumers, producers, and citizens. The Greek 
word "Oikinomia" can be translated as economics or household management.  This course will challenge 
students to take control of and properly manage the part of God's creation (household) that he has put 
in their charge. Students will integrate knowledge and practice the skills required to manage resources 
in a technologically expanding global economy. Real world topics covered will include economics, 
personal money management, as well as managing the precious commodities of time, relationships, and 
spiritual advancement. Three Hours. 
 
PHI 3010 Christianity and Critical Thinking 
This course will critically examine the beliefs and presuppositions of philosophers and philosophies over 
the centuries and their impact on modern Christianity and the Christian Worldview. A critical 
examination will begin by utilizing the lens of Scripture as the basis of truth in evaluating these beliefs. 
The application of that examination will be centered on the reasons for God as well as the nature of 
suffering and evil as learners are encouraged to formulate a biblically sound Christian Worldview. Three 
Hours. 
 
BIB 3300 Essential Doctrinal Themes 
This course is designed to engage the student in the essential doctrines of the Christian Faith and to help 
them begin to set a solid foundation for a well-rounded and well-informed theological position in their 
personal faith. The purpose of this class is to examine eight areas of theology in such a manner as to 
allow the learners to search the Scriptures and engage multiple theological authors so they can begin to 
articulate and defend what they believe about the Christian faith. Attention will be given to helping the 
student critically analyze the historical doctrinal commitments of Grace College and Seminary by 
engaging students in the evaluation of the presuppositions and conclusions of different doctrinal groups. 
Three Hours. 
STUDENT SUCCESS COURSEWORK 
Some students benefit from additional assistance to maximize their success in college-level courses. 
Based on their individual circumstances and standardized test scores, students may be enrolled in 
preparatory or pre-requisite course work, such as Academic Fundamentals for College or Principles of 
Writing. These courses do not fulfill the requirements of the Core. Generally, these courses also do not 
fulfill degree program requirements in majors or minors; however, students may be able to apply these 
courses to their major or minor if approved by the department as an open elective. 
 
 
GEN 1000 Academic Fundamentals for College 
Through discussion, lectures, outside assignments, and in-class learning experiences students are 
introduced to the course philosophy, taught the basic skill sets crucial to success in life and school, and 
assisted in making connection with peers and faculty. The foundation of the course is based on building 
effective self-management and self-responsibility. These important principles are emphasized in each 
skill set. One Hour. 
ENG 1020 Principles of Writing 
A foundational college course in grammar and composition designed to help prepare those students 
who, on the basis of ACT and SAT verbal scores and high school English grades, are not prepared to 
succeed in ENG 1100 Effective Writing. Grammar review, paragraph writing, and essay writing are 
studied and practiced. Three Hours.   

COM 2130 Interpersonal Communication 
An examination of the process of communication in interpersonal relationships focusing on the role of 
the self, people perception, the environment, and the interaction of interpersonal orientations. Personal 
skills in resolving conflict and stimulating friendships are examined through exposure to theory, practical 
exercises, and the analysis of experiences in current relationships. Three hours. 
 
COM 2170 Communication Ethics and Theories 
This course explores moral reasoning and practice in the communication field as well as the major 
theoretical approaches to communication. Case studies are used to examine truth telling, business 
pressures, deception, fairness, privacy, social justice, and the relationship between ethics, theories, and 
practice. Areas of application include advertising, the entertainment industry, politics, and the church. 
Three hours. 
 
COM 2610 Political Communication 
An introductory course to the study of political communication. Topics include political theory, 
campaign communication, public address, navigating media, and electoral politics. Three hours. 
 
 
COM 2700 Public Relations Principles 
An introduction to the theory and practice of public relations, emphasizing its publics, management 
function, writing skills, communication processes, tools, and professional ethics. Each student works 
with a community partner to facilitate public relations in a real-world setting. Prerequisite: COM 1100. 
Three hours. 
 
COM 3030 Persuasion 
An overview of the sources, formats, and features of persuasion. Students analyze persuasion in 
political, religious, advertising, and everyday rhetorical settings. They also examine the nature of 
effective and ineffective persuasion. Students will make persuasive presentations. Prerequisite: COM 
1100. Three hours. 
 
COM 3320 Critical Media Studies  
A critical survey of mass media and its effect on societal structure. This course surveys media from a 
variety of perspectives in order to understand the role that media has in shaping various worldviews. It 
explores economic controls, governmental controls, problems, effects of media, and societal evolution 
of the information and entertainment media. Three hours. 
 
COM 3340 American Political Rhetoric 
This junior-level seminar course is an overview of the history and confluence of rhetoric and policy 
decisions. Content spans the history of American identity in an effort to identify and understand the 
traits that have constituted American political discourse. Topics include, but are not limited to, the 
speeches and writings of early explorers, presidents, civil rights leaders, suffragists, businesspeople, and 
religious leaders. Three hours. 
 
COM 3440 Professional Communication 
A course in advanced public speaking and presentation techniques incorporating digital tools. Students 
learn about and practice video conferencing techniques, digital presentation tools, social media 
application, and online interviewing with application for communication specialists, aspiring business 
professionals, and others. Includes best practices, tips, and tricks for each medium and each 
opportunity. Prerequisite: COM 1100. Three hours. 
 
COM 3460 Organizational Communication and Behavior 
A survey of various applications of communication theory to business and organizational life. Special 
emphasis is given to small groups, interviewing skills, and persuasive proposals. Prerequisite: COM 1100. 
Three hours. 
 
COM 3500 Communication Research Methods 
A survey of the methods used in communication research. Students examine and critique methods, and 
participate in their own research projects using the course instruction. Prerequisite: COM 2170. Three 
hours. 
 
COM 3600 Social Media Communication 
An in-depth course covering the burgeoning importance of social media as a communication outlet. 
Includes analysis of culture shift leading to social media’s powerful impact and tools for analyzing social 
media effectiveness. Three hours.  

 
COM 3650 Digital Publishing Tools 
This course covers techniques and processes involved in content creation utilizing such digital publishing 
mediums as WordPress, Squarespace, and other online platforms. Three hours. 
 
COM 3800 Selected Topics in Communication 
 A selected communication topic offered on an as-available basis. Content may include historical 
communication, specialized communication theory, special projects, or timely topical subjects. Three 
hours. 
 
COM 4140 Argumentation and Debate 
An examination of the logical structure and function of argument in oral and written discourse with 
special attention given to fallacies and test of evidence. Students will engage in two-person and four-
person classroom debates. Prerequisite: COM 1100. Three hours. 
 
COM 4240 Public Relations and Advertising Writing 
This course is designed provides an orientation to and practice in the principles, techniques, formats, 
and skills necessary to be a writer in these exciting fields. Students will develop specific pieces such as 
press releases, internal memos, fact sheets, and public service announcements, commercials and 
promotions for print, electronic media and the Web. Prerequisite: COM 2700. Three hours. 
 
COM 4910–4930 Communication Internship 
An independent, communication-related internship monitored by a department faculty member and by 
an on-site supervisor. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of involvement and the 
number of learning objectives accomplished. Some internships are paid positions. Internships must be 
arranged through department faculty. One to three hours. 
 

ENG 1020 Principles of Writing 
A foundational college course designed to prepare students for success in ENG 1100 Effective Writing. 
Placement in this course is usually automatic and is based on ACT/SAT test scores, Grace’s Writing 
Placement Assessment, and/or other indicators. This course emphasizes transferable academic literacy 
skills, writing as a recursive process, awareness of genre and audience, organization, and writing 
mechanics and style. Three hours.   
 
ENG 1100 Effective Writing 
A course designed to help students develop and hone the skills necessary for clear and persuasive 
writing at the college level and beyond. The primary focus of the course is scholarly research and 
writing, with emphasis on finding and evaluating sources, integrating and documenting sources, 
improving writing structure and organization, implementing rhetorical strategies, practicing revision and 
peer workshop, and strengthening writing mechanics. Three hours. 
 
ENG 2300 Advanced Writing  
A course for students who have mastered college-ready writing and whose academic or career 
objectives require professional-level writing skills. This class is designed to introduce students to 
theories of written communication; expand their rhetorical skills; improve the clarity, accuracy, 
grammar, and structure of their writing; and give them experience writing for different audiences across 


a variety of platforms (including digital media). In addition to extensive writing, the course involves 
interactive workshops where students learn to give and receive useful feedback to improve their own 
and others’ writing. Prerequisite: ENG 1100. Three hours.  
 
ENG 3170 Creative Writing and Workshop 
An introductory course emphasizing the process of creative writing in a variety of genres. The course 
offers a workshop approach with revision techniques and mutual criticism. Three hours. 
 
ENG 3180 Selected Topics in Creative Writing 
A narrowly focused, upper-level creative writing course exploring a particular genre or style (for 
example, flash fiction, speculative fiction, novellas, screenplays, etc.), or a particular aspect of writing 
(for example, dialogue, action, etc.). Prerequisite: ENG 3170. Three hours.    
 
ENG 3232 Intermediate Fiction 
An intermediate creative writing course focusing on fiction through model readings, writing exercises, 
and workshops. Prerequisite: ENG 3170. Three hours.   
 
ENG 3252 Intermediate Poetry 
An intermediate creative writing course focusing on poetry through model readings of a variety of poetic 
forms, writing exercises, and workshops. Prerequisite: ENG 3170. Three hours.  
 
ENG 3300 Introduction to Linguistics 
A survey of the primary features of language, including phonology, morphology, semantics, first and 
second language acquisition, how the brain processes languages, and how languages change through 
linguistic examples and exercises drawn from a world-wide sample of languages. Three hours. 
 
ENG 4001-03 Creative Writing Portfolio Practicum 
An intensive, independent creative writing practicum supervised by a faculty member and cumulating in 
a substantial portfolio of original work. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of 
involvement and also upon the number of learning objectives accomplished. Registration for this 
practicum requires instructor approval. One to three hours.  
 
ENG 4101-03 Literary Magazine Practicum 
A practical experience organizing, editing, formatting, and promoting Grace College’s literary magazine. 
Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of involvement and also upon the number of 
learning objectives accomplished. Registration for this practicum requires instructor approval. One to 
three hours. 
 
ENG 4830 English Internship 
An independent, English-related internship monitored by a department faculty member and by an on-
site supervisor. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of involvement and the number 
of learning objectives accomplished. Some internships are paid positions. Internships must be arranged 
through department faculty. Three hours. 
 
LIT 2000 Introduction to Literary Studies 
This class serves as a gateway to the English major. It provides students with an intensive experience of 
discovering how literature makes meaning, acquaints students with the standard analytic modes of the 
discipline, and introduces students to literary scholarship at the college level. Three hours. 

LIT 2150 British Literature I 
A study of British literature from the Anglo-Saxon era through the eighteenth century. The course 
introduces the major political, historical, cultural, and literary influences of each period, and considers 
how these forces shaped individual literary texts and vice versa. Three hours. 
 
LIT 2160 British Literature II  
A continuation of the previous course, concentrating on Romantic, Victorian, modernist, and 
postcolonial literature. The course introduces the major political, historical, cultural, and literary 
influences of each period, and considers how such forces shaped individual works of literature and vice 
versa. Three hours. 
 
LIT 2200 American Literature I  
A survey of the development of American literature from colonial times through revolutionist, romantic, 
and transcendentalist literature up to mid-nineteenth century, across multiple genres. Three hours. 
 
LIT 2210 American Literature II  
A continuation of the above course concentrating on the rise of realism, modernist, and post-modernist 
literature in multiple genres. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3000 Classics of World Literature 
An exploration of major works of world literature representing a variety of genres, periods, and/or 
cultures (excluding American and British). Three hours. 
 
LIT 3100 Digital Narratives 
Digital Narratives examines how digital technologies have transformed the ways in which stories are 
told. This course analyzes and discusses films, podcasts, online literature, interactive literature, social 
media as literature, video games, and story-based marketing. Throughout, the course explores essential 
features of narrative, and which of these features are effectively expressed in different media forms. 
These techniques are then applied in the major projects of the course, such as a podcast, a film or photo 
narrative, and/or an interactive online story. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3240 Christian Classics 
A survey of significant contributions in Christian literature including such authors as Lewis, Dante, 
Milton, Bunyan, MacDonald, Tolkien, Sayers, and O’Connor. The course is designed to offer a focused 
integration of theology and literature. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3251 Genre Study: Poetry 
A study of poetry as a major form of literature, including an analysis of poetic devices, verse forms and 
structures, aesthetic values, and thematic considerations. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3261 Genre Study: Drama  
A study of drama as a major form of literature, including the history and interpretative analysis of 
dramatic literature from a variety of historical and cultural contexts. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3265: Genre Study: Short Story 
A study of short story as a major form of literature, including an analysis of techniques, aesthetic values, 
and thematic considerations. Three hours. 


 
LIT 3285 Global Shakespeare(s) 
A study of the aesthetics and techniques of interpreting Shakespeare’s dramatic works across a range of 
media and cultural contexts. Though topics and works under consideration vary, sustained attention is 
given to the process of adapting canonical Shakespeare--as well as the political implications of doing so--
in particular cultural settings. Special consideration is given to the local histories motivating 
contemporary adaptations. Three hours.  
 
LIT 3420 C.S. Lewis 
A survey of the works of C.S. Lewis which examines his apologetic, rhetorical, and literary powers. 
Attention is given to Lewis the fantasist, the science fiction prophet, and the theological storyteller. 
Three hours. 
 
LIT 3430 Women Writers 
A study of women’s writing and critical perspectives. Topics and texts under consideration vary from 
class to class, but may focus on a specific theme, issue, genre, or time period. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3540 Topics in Contemporary Literature  
A study of works of fiction, poetry, drama, and/or nonfiction of the past 50 years. Topics under 
consideration vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development 
of contemporary literature, a particular genre, a consideration of a theme or issue common across a 
number of works, and/or a study of works in the context of historical, aesthetic, or cultural events. 
Three hours. 
 
LIT 3670 Young Adult Literature 
A study of the history, characteristics, genres, and cultural and pedagogical significance of young adult 
literature. This course also addresses issues related to the teaching and study of young adult literature 
such as censorship, diversity, and curriculum development. Three hours.   
 
LIT 3750 Selected Topics in Literature 
Content varies class by class, but features an intensive focus on a specific topic, genre, theme, period, 
culture or region, etc. Examples include Science Fiction & Fantasy, Mythology, The Graphic Novel, etc. 
LIT 3750 is a cumulative course and may be taken more than once, provided the content is substantially 
different each time. Three hours. 
 
LIT 3800 Topics in French Literature  
A study of French literary genres, periods, and authors. Topics vary, but may include a thematically-
focused survey from medieval to contemporary French literature, the development of a genre, or a 
literary movement in a particular period. Students will develop a lexical and analytical toolkit for 
analyzing literary expression, and will learn to substantiate and develop ideas through interpretative 
essays and classroom discussion. No prior knowledge of French language is required for students taking 
this as a literature elective; major reading and written assignments will be in English. See FRE 3800 for a 
cross-listed section of this course for French language students. Three hours.  
 
LIT 4200 Major Author(s) 
A concentrated study of the works of a particular author (such as Joyce or Austen), pair of authors (such 
as Hemingway & Fitzgerald) or small group of authors (such as the Bloomsbury Group, the Inklings, or 


 
the Shelley Circle). Topics and texts vary by class. LIT 4200 is a cumulative course and may be taken 
more than once, provided the content is substantially different each time. Three hours. 
 
LIT 4350 Literary Theory 
An intensive study of the major theories and schools of literary criticism, such as formalism, reader-
oriented criticism, deconstruction, new historicism, etc. The course features representative readings and 
application to selected texts, and is especially recommended for students considering a graduate degree 
in English. Three hours. 
 
 
HISTORY AND POLITICAL SCIENCE PROGRAM COURSES 
GEO 1010 World Geography 
The cultural and physical elements of human habitats, the significance of the elements of the earth to 
humans, and the use of maps and their importance. Three hours. 
 
GEO 3300 Geography of North America 
This course is designed to give students an appreciation of the North American continent, within the 
context of social, physical, and historical geography. This includes a module on Indiana geography and 
history. Three hours. 
 
GEO 4400 Selected Topics in Geography 
This is a directed program of reading and discussion concerning specifically selected topics in 
Geography. This may involve field work. Three hours. 
 
HIS 1050 Current Issues in Historical Context 
This class examines the historical and political development of at least two broad topics that remain part 
of contemporary discussion and illustrates the way the past can help students understand current 
debates and conversations. The topics chosen are meant to represent areas of significant concern for 
understanding current issues and moral questions. The course asks the question, “How did we get 
here?” and provides a foundation for discussions of diversity, citizenship, Christian ethics, and cultural 
awareness. Topics will likely change over time. Three hours.  
 
HIS 1130 World History and the Historical Method 
This global history course will examine important developments in the civilizations of Europe, Asia, 
Africa, and the Western Hemisphere from pre-history to the rise of globalism in the 21st century. 
Themes to be investigated will include: Politics and government, art and ideas, religion and philosophy, 
family and society, science and technology, earth and the environment, and interaction and exchange. 
An emphasis will be placed on showing how these meta-themes are manifested in cultures throughout 
the world. This course will also serve as an introduction to the methods historians use in the field. Three 
hours. 
 
HIS 2050 American Journeys 
In this topical survey of the history of the United States to the end of World War II, students will be 
introduced to the major issues, broad developments, and perennial questions that cut to the heart of 
American identity. The course will cover such topics as the ideological origins of the American nation, 
the historical relationship between state and national sovereignty, race and slavery, sectional tensions 

 

 
and the Civil War, social and religious movements, and the culture wars that continue to impact 
American society today. Three hours 
 
HIS 2060 American Journeys II 
This topical survey of the history of the United States is a continuation of HIS 2050 American Journeys. 
Students will be introduced to many of the major issues, broad developments, and perennial questions 
that cut to the heart of American identity. The chronological scope of the course may vary depending on 
the needs of the Department of History and Political Science, the School of Professional and Online 
Education, and those of approved dual credit institutions. Depending on the scope, the course may 
cover such topics as the Gilded Age, the Progressive Era, America’s role in the World War’s, the Civil 
Rights movement, the Cold War, and the rise of contemporary political and social movements. Three 
hours (mainly offered via dual credit arrangement). 
 
HIS 3050 Artifacts and Exhibits  
This course introduces students to best practices for the identification, cataloging, care, and display of 
historical artifacts. It covers the causes of physical deterioration of artifacts and the relevant methods 
and theories of preserving materials for future generations. The course also introduces students to the 
process of interpreting and curating material culture for the purpose of educating the public. This course 
is designed for those interested in careers in the field of public history, which can include Museum 
Studies, archival work, archaeology, and historical preservation. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3280 Colonial and Revolutionary America 
In this upper-level course, students will be introduced to European colonization, especially within North 
America, including the social, economic, cultural and political development of the Atlantic System. It also 
examines the divisions in colonial society, the causes, context and progress of the American Revolution, 
as well as the unifying features of American patriotism. Topics also include indigenous civilization, New 
England society, diversity in the Mid-Atlantic region, Christian missions, and the Atlantic slave trade. The 
course will conclude by focusing on the construction of the American political system along with the 
limits of democracy. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3350 The Era of the American Civil War 
This covers the period of 1848 to 1877 and examines the causes, nature, and consequences of the 
American Civil War. Topics to discuss will include the nature of slavery, the rise of abolitionism, the 
collapse and reconstruction of the American political system, and the causes and effects of the Civil War 
on American society. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3360 Wild, Wild West 
This is an in-depth investigation of the geography, history and mythology of the American West. The 
effects of this Western image on Americans as a whole, as well as global reactions to this image will be 
examined. Three hours.  
 
HIS 3370 The Progressive Era to the Atomic Age 
This course begins with the world’s first populist movement and continues to the end of World War II. 
Students will see how a rural and agrarian United States was transformed into an urban industrial world 
power. Three hours. 
 

 
HIS 3390 Religion in American History 
From major world religions to a host of small religious movements, the variety of religious expression in 
America is almost endless. Indeed, religious pluralism and diversity has become one of the defining 
features of American society. Naturally, this diverse religious landscape has not taken shape overnight. 
Rather, it has developed over centuries and has included a complex spectrum of theological approaches, 
ethical positions, charismatic men and women, ordinary citizens and even political involvement. This 
course is meant to provide students with an introduction to the religious diversity in America while 
emphasizing its historical context and development. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3590 Ancient History 
A survey of the history of the ancient roots of civilizations beginning c. 3000 B.C. at the river valleys of 
Mesopotamia and Egypt and ending at the fall of the Western Roman Empire, A.D. 476. The remarkable 
contributions of the ancient civilizations of the Near East, the Greek city-states, China, India, Sub-
Saharan Africa, Mesoamerica, and of the Roman Empire will be discussed. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3660 Renaissance and Reformation 
A study of the era of transition from the Later Middle Ages to the rise of science in the early modern era, 
c. 1300-1700. Major themes include the Italian and Northern Renaissances; the Continental, English, and 
Catholic Reformations; religious wars such as the Thirty Years’ War; and the rise of science. Special 
attention will be given to the relationship between social change and shifts in European intellectual life 
and spirituality. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3720 Europe in the Age of Modernity  
A study of European culture, society, and politics from the French Revolution into the twenty-first 
century. Students will investigate the growth of modern nation-states, constitutional governments, 
empire and the fall of empire, and the great wars of the twentieth century. Students will also study 
great themes such as political revolutions and reforms, the effects of industrialization and urbanization, 
changing class structures, family and gender relations, and the importance of religion in an age of 
modernity. The concept of Europe in the age of post-modernity will also be discussed. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3800 History and Geography of Africa 
This is a course designed to give students an appreciation of the African continent. Discussion will center 
on understanding the context of the physical, cultural, political, and historical geography of its peoples. 
Three hours. 
 
HIS 3850 History and Geography of Asia  
This is a course designed to give students an appreciation of Asia - specifically, China, India, and Japan.  
Discussion will center on understanding the context of the physical, cultural, political, and historical 
geography of its peoples. Students will also discuss and analyze the growing importance of Asia to the 
global economy. Three hours. 
 
HIS 3900 Latin America and the Atlantic World      
This course is an introduction to the cultural, political and geographical history of Latin America and the 
impact of Spanish and Portuguese colonization. As such, it examines the culture and history of Central 
and South America and to a lesser extent, the Caribbean. It examines the region’s indigenous 
civilizations, society under colonial rule, independence movements and Latin America’s role in political 
events during the modern era. The course will have a special focus on Mexico and may be integrated 
with an on-site tour to Mexico City and the surrounding region. Three hours. 

 

HIS 4400 Selected Topics in History 
This applied course includes direction in research and will normally involve a field-trip experience. Topics 
covered may include Brethren History, Family History, The India of Gandhi, Return to the Roots of the 
Civil Rights, Mexico, Scotland, India, and Tudor England. Three hours. 
 
HIS 4560 Museum Internship 
Students are to observe and participate in the activities of a museum or other public history 
organization. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of involvement and the number of 
learning objectives accomplished. Students meet regularly with an instructor for encouragement, 
personal development, and assessment. Three to six hours. 
 
HIS 4570 Public History Lab 
This full-semester course provides the framework for - and implementation of - experiential learning for 
students working in a museum and/or archives setting on campus (The Winona History Center, the Billy 
Sunday Historic Home, or the Morgan Library). It is essentially an internship experience but conducted 
with a substantial degree of structure, training, and oversight; and students will gain real-life practice 
working with museum patrons, processing archival collections, digitizing historical documents, and/or 
conducting research for the production of finding aids or museum exhibits. Three hours. 
 
HIS 4950 History Internship 
Students are to observe and participate in the activities of an organization that promotes professional 
development. Students may choose from a wide range of organizations including museums, libraries, 
archives, or state and national parks. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of 
involvement and also upon the number of learning objectives accomplished. Students are to meet in a 
seminar format once a month with an instructor for encouragement and personal development and 
assessment. Three hours. 
LAW 2500 Mediation Team   
This varsity academic team focuses on learning and practicing important mediation skills. Students may 
participate in regional and national mediation conferences and tournaments. Three hours, repeatable. 
 
LAW 4400 Selected Topics: LSAT Preparation 
This is an investigation into the LSAT exam, study methods, and other tools for student success on the 
LSAT. The class is open to any student and may also explore other facets of the law school application 
process, the evaluation of law schools, and what to expect upon enrollment in law school. Three hours. 
 
LAW 4980 Pre-law Internship    
Students are to observe, study, and participate in various areas of the legal profession. This will involve 
job shadowing private or public attorneys and prosecutors, spending time in courtrooms observing 
criminal proceedings, and/or interning with public officials. Students are to submit a journal of their 
experiences and report their findings orally. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of 
involvement and the number of learning objectives accomplished. Three hours. 
 
POS 2010 Introduction to Political Thought 
This course includes several approaches to political philosophy. First, it provides a general overview of 
the dominant political ideologies from the ancient to the contemporary world. Second, it provides a 
general survey of some of the most influential political thinkers whose writings and theories have given 


 
rise to the modern political landscape. This will focus heavily on the development of western political 
thought but may include selections from Islamic civilization, southeast Asia, or other non-western 
contexts. Third, this course will include an introduction to more recent thinkers, or even popular 
personalities, whose work is relevant to the intersection of faith and politics. Three hours. 
 
POS 2200 Introduction to American Government 
This introduces students to how the political system in America functions. It focuses on the actual 
workings of the American government and starts with the cultural and constitutional contexts of 
American politics. Three hours. 
 
POS 3010 State and Local Government  
This is an examination of the structure and interplay between state, county, and local governments.  
Issues such as social security, zoning, welfare, public health, and the environment will be examined from 
the point of view of how they originate at the local levels yet how they exist and grow within federal 
guidelines. This contains a module on Indiana politics and history. Three hours. 
 
POS 3100 International Relations 
This is an investigation into the principles and concepts which govern the relationship of the United 
States with the nations of the global community. Three hours. 
 
POS 3760 Britain and the World 
This honors course is an investigation of modern Britain and its global influence from c. 1485 to the 
present. Classes will be in a seminar format that encourages discussions of important primary and 
secondary source materials and relevant themes. Themes to be discussed will include the rise of 
constitutional monarchy, the growth of the common law, the rise and decline of Protestantism, the 
influence of social reform movements, the growth and consequences of empire, the various cultures 
within Great Britain, and the Anglo-American influence in the world in the 21st century. Three hours. 
 
POS 3950 Islam, Politics, and the Middle East 
This course examines the religious origins, political development, and geographic expansion of the 
Islamic World and its relationship to western society. It addresses the relationship between Islam, 
Judaism and Christianity, examines the Crusades, the Palestinian-Israeli Conflict as well as recent 
political tensions between the United States and the Middle East since the 1970s. It also examines 
perceptions of Islam as well as the rise of Islamic fundamentalism and Jihadist movements. Three Hours. 
 
POS 4400 Selected Topics in Political Science 
This is a directed program of reading and discussion concerning specifically selected topics in political 
science. This may involve a field trip experience. Three hours. 
 
POS 4950 Political Science Internship 
Students are to observe and to participate in the activities of an organization that promotes professional 
development. Students may choose from a wide range of activities involving work with political 
organizations or specific politicians. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and length of 
involvement and the number of learning objectives accomplished. Students are to meet in a seminar 
format once a month with an instructor for encouragement and personal development and assessment. 
Three hours.   
 

 
JOURNALISM COURSES 
JOU 1610–1630 Practical Journalism 
Practical experience in journalism involving work on the campus newspaper, The Sounding Board, 
and/or related website. Course credit is determined by the faculty advisor of the publication 
commensurate with the nature of the student’s involvement and responsibility. One to three hours, 
repeatable. 
 
JOU 2100 Introduction to Journalism 
A course devoted to learning how to write news stories, feature stories, broadcast stories, and opinion 
pieces, all using the Associated Press Stylebook. The course stresses information gathering and 
interviewing, as well as the ability to produce under a publication deadline. Pre- or co-requisite: ENG 
1100. Three hours. 
 
JOU 2700 Layout & Design 
A hands-on course in which students are exposed to InDesign and Adobe Photoshop while learning the 
most up-to-date principles of layout and design for newspapers, magazines, the Web, and other media. 
Contact the English & Journalism Program Director for current information about software and 
hardware required for this course. Three hours.  
 
JOU 3130 Editing 
A course that focuses on building skills in preparing copy for publishing in various formats. Topics will 
include proofreading, copy editing, writing style, writing headlines and cutlines/captions, cropping 
photos, typography, and legal considerations. Basics of page design and layout will also be introduced. 
Three hours. 
 
JOU 3140 Writing for Publication 
A magazine writing course involving the writing and marketing of freelance articles to periodicals and 
online publications. Publication of articles is a goal of the course. Prerequisite: ENG 1100. Three hours. 
 
JOU 3150 Advanced Reporting 
A course that builds on the fundamental reporting and writing skills introduced in JOU 2100. Emphasis is 
placed on developing critical thinking, interviewing, and research skills, as well as conforming to AP 
style. Non-traditional and digital methods of reporting are also examined. Prerequisite: JOU 2100. Three 
hours. 
 
JOU 4910–4930 Journalism Internship 
The well-qualified student further develops journalistic skills through placement in a professional 
environment on or off the campus. Supervision and evaluation by on-site supervisor and department 
faculty member are intrinsic parts of the program. Credit is awarded based upon the intensity and 
length of involvement and the number of learning objectives accomplished. One to three hours. 
 
FRE 1010–1020 Beginning French Language and Culture I and II 
Students are put in the presence of authentic, un-simplified French and are trained to use it in the 
dynamic context of communication. Emphasis is placed on oral proficiency, the development of skills, 
self-expression, and cultural insight. Online laboratory work is required. Three hours each. 
 
FRE 2010–2020 Intermediate French Language and Culture I and II 
Continuation of language study advancing students toward comprehension, speaking, reading, and 
writing while gaining a deeper appreciation for the francophone culture, language, and people. Online 
laboratory work is required. Prerequisites: FRE 1020 or its equivalent. Three hours each. 
 
FRE 2120 Advanced French Conversation  
This course improves oral expression through pronunciation exercises, vocabulary building, and 
development of communicative strategies. Students will build fluency in small group speaking activities 
and practice comprehension through engagement with video and audio media. In-class discussions are 
based on short readings from the contemporary French-speaking world. Assignments include oral 
presentations, debates, interviews, and creative assignments such as podcasts. Prerequisite: FRE 2020 
or its equivalent. Three hours. 
 
FRE 3770 French Elective 
This advanced French course examines an area of French or francophone culture not 
normally covered in other required courses. Course materials and assignments focus on 
an area of cultural expression—such as cinema or music—or an event in French or 
francophone history—such as Mai 68 or the Algerian war. Prerequisite: FRE 2020 or 
instructor permission. Three hours. 
FRE 3870 The Art of French Composition 
This course improves written proficiency through intensive study of grammatical and syntactical 
structures and rhetorical styles. Assigned readings include examples from fiction and non-fiction genres. 
Students will build writing skills through regular exercises and compositions ranging from creative to 
expository styles. All work in French. Prerequisite: FRE 2120 or its equivalent. Three hours. 
  
FRE 3800 Topics in French Literature (Cross-listed as LIT 3800) 
A study of French literary genres, periods, and authors. Topics vary, but may include a thematically-
focused survey from medieval to contemporary French literature, the development of a genre, or a 
literary movement in a particular period. Students will develop a lexical and analytical toolkit for 
analyzing literary expression, and will learn to substantiate and develop ideas through interpretative 
essays and classroom discussion. Major reading and written assignments will be in French. See LIT 3800 
for a cross-listed section of this course for non-French-speaking students. Prerequisite (for French 
students): FRE 2020 or its equivalent. Three hours.  
 
FRE 3880 French & Francophone Culture & Civilization 
An interdisciplinary study of French and Francophone culture. Topics vary, but may include studies in 
literature, art and architecture, film, or music, or may focus on cultural, social, or political events in a 
particular period. Students will learn to analyze cultural objects—verbal, visual, and material—within a 
historical context, and will bridge different disciplinary frameworks in class discussions and critical 
essays. Prerequisite: FRE 2120. Three hours.  

 
SPA 1010-1020 Beginning Spanish Language and Culture I and II 
Students are put in the presence of authentic, un-simplified Spanish and are trained to use it in the 
dynamic context of communication. Emphasis is placed on oral proficiency, the development of skills, 
self-expression, and cultural insight. Online laboratory work is required. Three hours each. 
 
SPA 2010-2020 Intermediate Spanish Language and Culture I and II 
Continuation of language study, advancing students toward comprehension, speaking, reading, and 
writing while gaining a deeper appreciation for the Spanish-speaking culture, language, and people. 
Online laboratory work is required. Prerequisites: SPA 1020 or its equivalent. Three hours each. 
 
SPA 2200 Advanced Spanish Conversation 
This course improves oral expression through pronunciation exercises, vocabulary building, and 
development of communicative strategies. Students will build fluency in small group speaking activities 
and practice comprehension through engagement with video and audio media. In-class discussions are 
based on short readings from the contemporary Spanish-speaking world. Assignments include oral 
presentations, debates, interviews, and creative assignments such as podcasts. Prerequisite: SPA 2020 
or its equivalent. Three hours. 
 
SPA 3200 The Art of Spanish Composition 
This course improves written proficiency through intensive study of grammatical and syntactical 
structures and rhetorical styles. Assigned readings include examples from fiction and non-fiction genres. 
Students will build writing skills through regular exercises and compositions ranging from creative to 
expository styles. All work in Spanish. Prerequisite: SPA 2200 or its equivalent. Three hours. 
 
SPA 3215 Topics in Hispanic Literature 
A study of Hispanic literary genres, periods, and authors. Topics vary, but may include a thematically-
focused survey from medieval to contemporary Hispanic literature, the development of a genre, or a 
literary movement in a particular period. Students will develop a lexical and analytical toolkit for 
analyzing literary expression, and will learn to substantiate and develop ideas through interpretative 
essays and classroom discussion. Major reading and written assignments will be in Spanish. Prerequisite: 
SPA 2020 or its equivalent. Three hours.  
 
SPA 3225 Topics in Hispanic Culture & Civilization 
An interdisciplinary study of Hispanic culture. Topics vary, but may include studies in literature, art and 
architecture, film, or music, or may focus on cultural, social, or political events in a particular period or 
region. Students will learn to analyze cultural objects—verbal, visual, and material—within a historical 
context, and will bridge different disciplinary frameworks in class discussions and critical essays. 
Prerequisite: SPA 2200 or its equivalent. Three hours.  
 
Additional Advanced Foreign Languages: On Campus 
For advanced students and those returning from overseas with the Grace Study Abroad Program, the 
following courses may be taken both fall and spring semesters. 
 
FRE/SPA 3810-3840 Readings  
Variable credit may be earned by readings in French or Spanish advanced literary texts from the Middle 
Ages to the present. One thousand pages are read in the foreign language for each credit. Readings 
must cover several areas including poetry, theatre, novels, and literary criticism. One to four hours. 
 

 
FRE/SPA 3910-3940 Independent Study 
In these independent study courses, the student will work with the instructor to develop a course of 
study focusing on culture and/or language. Academic credit will be determined based upon the learning 
outcomes in the syllabus along with the reading and assignments for the course. One to four hours. 
 
FRE/SPA 4510-4520 Teaching Practicum 
Supervised teaching of local school children or college students in French or Spanish. One to two hours. 
 
SED 4630 Methods of Teaching Foreign Language  
This course is a study of curriculum and methods of teaching a foreign language on both the elementary 
and secondary level, with special emphasis on performance objectives and methodology with classroom 
practice. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisites: SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 2600, SED 
3600, candidacy status. Three hours. 
 
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES COURSES  
HUM 4730 Interdisciplinary Internship 
An independent internship monitored by the Interdisciplinary Studies Advisor and by an on-site 
supervisor. Some internships are paid positions. Internships must be arranged through the 
Interdisciplinary Studies Advisor. Three hours. 
 
HUM 4810 Interdisciplinary Senior Research Project 
An independent research project directed by the Interdisciplinary Studies Advisor in collaboration with 
curricular area faculty. Research conducted for this course may include primary and secondary research, 
archival work, observation, and/or other methods appropriate to the student’s topic and project. The 
Interdisciplinary Senior Research Project, in conjunction with the Humanities Capstone Seminar, 
constitutes a substantial, original, scholarly project. Three hours. 

HUM 2000 Global Perspectives 
Global Perspectives equips students to read and understand contemporary literature from around the 
world. In this interdisciplinary course, students engage with varied cultural perspectives through novels, 
short stories, poems, graphic novels, films, and/or essays. The course situates these works with respect 
to complex contemporary issues such as post-colonialism, cultural hybridity, immigration, and cultural 
hegemony. Students will enhance their oral and written communication skills as they learn to analyze 
authors’ and filmmakers’ creative choices, and to discuss portrayals of culture through a redemptive 
theological framework. Prerequisite: ENG 1100. Three hours. 
 
HUM 3100 Cross-Cultural Communication 
This class examines the theory and practice of intercultural communication through 
readings, discussions, observational research, practicums, and in-class activities, we 
will identify the barriers to successful intercultural exchanges, and study and implement 
better practices for communicating across cultural differences. Course assignments and 
discussions are designed for application to everyday encounters with individuals from 
other cultures. Three hours. 
 

HUM 3210 Irish Studies 
This seminar-style course offers an interdisciplinary approach to Irish literature, history, politics, and 
culture. This course may be organized around a particular period or theme, or it may be taught as a 
general survey. Three hours. 
 
HUM 3220 Medieval Studies 
This course offers an interdisciplinary study of the political, literary, and intellectual development of 
European civilization from the decline of the Roman Empire to the Reformation of the sixteenth century. 
This course may be organized around a particular theme or taught as a general survey. Three hours. 
 
HUM 4900 Humanities Capstone Seminar 
This team-taught and interdisciplinary seminar is among students’ final educational experiences before 
degree completion. As such, its components allow students to showcase the academic abilities they 
have acquired through their degree program (through a thesis or project) and to think about and 
prepare for the next steps in their professional careers. Students participate in both interdisciplinary 
plenaries and discipline specific seminars. Students give a final presentation of their theses or projects at 
an interdisciplinary symposium. Three hours. 

HUM 2100 Creative Arts and Culture 
Through the landscape of cultural history, this course explores the human phenomenon of creativity 
from prehistoric culture to our contemporary urban society. Posing the question “Why creative arts?” 
this course examines how creativity and culture define and reflect each other. Viewed through a global, 
chronological, or thematic approach and in context of time and place, interrelationships of various 
modes of expression are presented for works of art, music, and literature. During the course, students 
are required to select two experiential activities (beyond Grace campus) for engaging in creative arts 
and culture. Examples include, but are not limited to, art museums, gallery exhibits, visual and 
performing arts festivals, international/cultural festivals, symphony orchestras, music concerts, 
theatrical productions, and literary events. Grace Core requirement. Course fees apply. Three hours. 

ART 1200 Drawing I  
An introductory course focusing on developing fundamental drawing skills and improving visual 
perception. The primary emphasis is on structural drawing and composition using dry media. A variety of 
studio exercises will be used. Three hours. 
 
ART 2010, 2020, 2030 Applied Field Research 
A practicum for focused research in the visual arts field with specific study applicable to studio, analysis, 
history, or technology. By consent of department only. May be repeated for credit. One, two or three 
hours. 
 
ART 2110 Art and Design Fundamentals 
From the simple application of color to the complex devices that create illusionary space, this 
foundational lecture/studio course concentrates on the basic elements of two- and three-dimensional 
design. Students will apply aesthetics and theoretical methods. Oral and written art criticisms are 
employed. Three hours. 
 
ART 2200 Ceramics I 
An introduction to the study of ceramics as a three-dimensional medium. Through hand-constructed 
and wheel-thrown clay forms, students will explore issues in contemporary art. Ceramics processes will 
include glazing and firing. Studio fees apply. Three hours. 
 
ART 2400 Painting I 
The study and application of wet painting media (acrylic) with an emphasis on a technical working knowledge 
through orginal concept and/or staged subject matter and its application to a personal style. Prerequisite: 
ART 1200 and ART 2110 or permission of instructor. Three hours. 
 
ART 2720 Drawing II - Observational Rendering  
This course focuses on aesthetic theories and practice of representational drawing. Observational 
rendering examines subject matter in natural and constructed environments, and in context of 
micro/macro organic forms. The course includes sketchbook journal development (replaces ART 2700). 
Prerequisite: ART 1200. Three hours. 
 
ART 3180 Painting II 
Students learn advanced techniques and skills in wet media application that includes watercolor, 
acrylics, and/or other media. Exploration of themes will include original concepts such as landscape, still 
life, and portraiture. Prerequisite: ART 2400 or permission of instructor. Three hours. 
 
ART 3200 Ceramics II 
A continuation of the study of ceramics as a three-dimensional medium. Through hand-constructed and 
wheel-thrown clay forms, students will explore skill development, historical influences, and ceramics 
processes that include forming, glazing and firing. Studio fees apply. Three hours. 
 
ART 3450 Digital Drawing/Painting  
This course explores unique expressive applications of the student’s drawing ability through digital 
technology. Included are experiments in structural drawing, sketching, and painting utilizing Adobe and other 
software. Prerequisite: ART 1200 and ART 2400.  Three hours.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
ART 3510 Art History: A Global Context 
A contextual global survey of Non-Western and Western visual art. From pre-history to the Modern era, this 
course examines visual expression that includes art, architecture, and indigenous artifacts from the 
continents of Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Europe (fulfills ART 3310 pre-2021-22 checksheet). Three hours. 
Open to all majors. 
ART 3520 Contemporary Visual Culture  
An examination of the complexities of aesthetics and meaning in context of contemporary visual art as 
expressed through cultural constructs. Analysis will consider the object and viewer and how production, 
reception, and intention are related. The study will include artworks created for social advocacy within 
natural environments, urban settings, and “place” galleries (fulfills ART 3320 pre-2021-22 checksheet). Three 
hours. Open to all majors. 
ART 4210 Selected Topics in Art History 
Selected art historical or contemporary topic. Content may include studio-based research or experiential 
art that coincides with selected topic of study. Open to all majors. Repeatable with differing topics. 
Three hours. 
 
ART 4230 Art Integrations 
Advanced level synthesis in making art forms with cross-discipline or community integration that would 
result in artwork utilized in a final portfolio, exhibition, or public installation. Pre-requisite: ART 1200 
and/or ART 2110, or other medium-specific ART or VCD courses, or permission of instructor. Three 
hours.  
 
ART 4730 Art Internship 
Qualified visual arts majors receive on-the-job training at a cooperating organization. Prerequisite: 
approval by program director and/or department chair. Three hours. 
 
ART 4830 Advanced Individual Studies 
This advanced level visual arts research course focuses on an individual topic selected by the student 
and results in a visual arts product that contributes to the student’s senior portfolio and art/design 
public art exhibition. This may include traditional dry, wet, mixed, or digitized media integrating major 
and minor fields of studies. Prerequisite: completion of major course requirements, approval of research 
proposal by lead faculty, and permission of department chair. Three hours. May be repeated up to 6 
hours. 
 
CIN 0010 LA Film Studies Center 
The Film Studies minor is offerd in collaboration with the Council of Christian Colleges and 
Universities (CCCU) GlobalEd program and Olivet Nazarene University. Sixteen credit hours of the 
minor are taken on location in Los Angeles, CA at the LA Film School. Students will participate in 
program internships and core courses.  
 
To be eligible for LAFSC, students must be at the Junior or Senior level. The application is a three-
step process. Students will need to: 
1) Apply through Grace Institute for Global Studies: global@grace.edu, one year in advance of the 
experience;  
2) Confirm all costs and make financial arrangements with the Grace Business Office;  
3) Apply directly to the LAFSC program through Olivet Nazarene University (olivet.edu/lafsc) at 
least 2-3 months in advance of the semester experience.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: At the time of this Catalog revision, the LAFSC program is offered only in Spring semesters 
during the academic year. Grace application deadline is no later than April 1 for the following 
Spring LAFSC experience. For LAFSC application information visit: olivet.edu/lafsc, or contact Grace 
Institute for Global Studies: global@grace.edu. For more information on CCCU GlobalEd programs 
visit: cccuglobaled.org. 
 
CIN 3290 Introduction to Flm, Faith, and Contemporary Culture 
This introductory course examines film as an art form. Students will learn to critically read 
and analyze techniques in filmmaking. This course will also investigate the relationship of 
film to faith and contemporary culture. (Replaces CIN 3270 and CIN 3300) Three hours.  
 
MDI 2000 Intro to Media Production replaced with VCD 2550 Fundamentals of Video Production 
MDI; MDI 3500 Media Production II suggested replacement WMU 2800 Live Sound or WMU Intro to 
Recording; MDI 3800 Media Production III replaced with VCD 2310 Visual Communication Desgin I; 
MDI 4410 Advanced Media Production replaced with VCD 3200 Multimedia Design. 
 
 
PHT 2010, 2020, 2030 Applied Field Research 
A practicum for focused research in the photographic arts with specific study applicable to studio, 
analysis, history, or technology. By consent of department chair only. May be repeated for credit. One to 
three hours. 
 
PHT 2600 Intro to Digital Photography  
This course provides foundational instruction for the digital camera. Students will learn manual settings 
for capturing photographic images. DSLR camera required. Open to all majors. Studio fees apply. Three 
hours. 
 
PHT 3600 Photography II – Studio Lighting  
This course focuses on studio lighting techniques for product and portrait photography. DSLR (digital) 
camera required. Prerequisite PHT 2600. Studio fees apply. Three hours. 
 
PHT 3800 Photography III - Alternative Processes 
This course explores advanced alternative processes in film and digital application. Students will focus 
on conceptual abilities, photographic experimentation, and technical processes. Each student must 
provide a DSLR (digital); an SLR (film) camera or specialty camera may be utilized. Prerequisites: PHT 
3600. Studio fees apply. Three hours. 
 
PHT 4300 Advanced Photography 
This course will emphasize advanced individual photographic exploration for the purpose of developing 
significant personal imagery. Students will create a body of work that focuses on portfolio development 
and professional application in film, digital, and alternative processes. Each student must provide a DSLR 
(digital); an SLR (film) camera or specialty camera may be utilized. Prerequisite: PHT 3800. Studio fees 
apply. Three hours 
 
PHT 4730 Photography Internship 
Qualified visual arts majors receive on-the-job training at a cooperating organization. Prerequisite: 
approval by program director and/or department chair. Three hours. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
THT 3110, 3120, 3130 Stagecraft  
A practicum in play production with related projects in scene design, set construction, costume design 
and construction, make-up application, sound and lighting, and house management. By consent of 
department only. May be repeated for credit. One to three hours. 
 
THT 3210 Introduction to Theatre  
An overview of the field of theatre including history, an introduction to dramatic types, the analysis of 
scripts, design, and directing. Three hours. 
 
THT 3250 Fundamentals of Acting  
An introduction to acting theory and practice. Practical application of performance techniques; 
character development is given special emphasis. Prerequisite: THT 3210. Three hours. 
 
THT 4250 Directing  
Theoretical and practical training in play direction with emphasis on selecting plays, conducting 
rehearsals, and working with actors. Prerequisite: THT 3210 or permission of department. Three hours. 
 
THT 4260 Religious Drama Workshop  
A practicum in the writing, performance, production, and direction of dramatic works with religious 
emphasis. Three hours. 
 
THT 4410, 4420, 4430 Applied Performance and Production  
For more information on performance and production opportunities, contact the Theatre instructor. By 
consent of department only. May be repeated for credit. One to three hours. 
 
VCD  2010, 2020, 2030 Applied Field Research 
A practicum for focused research in areas of visual communication design or illustration with specific 
study applicable to studio, analysis, history, or technology. By consent of department chair only. May be 
repeated for credit. One to three hours. 
 
VCD 2120 Three-Dimensional Design  
This is an introductory studio course in the varied principles of three-dimensional design. Projects 
explore traditional and experimental materials. Students will be expected to supply a variety of 
materials such as found or recycled objects for re-purposing into art forms. Studio fees may apply. 
Prerequisite ART 2110. Three hours. 
 
VCD 2310 Visual Communication Design I  
An introductory course that uses manual and digital processes to explore visual communication theories 
and techniques. Utilizing Adobe software, this course introduces the development of visual skills 
through digital photo manipulation, illustrative rendering, and graphics file preparation. Relationships 
between content and social and cultural context will be explored. Prerequisite: ART 2110. Three hours. 
 
VCD 2550 Fundamentals of Video Production 
Introductory training for in-studio video production editing techniques and processes. Three hours.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
VCD 3200 Multimedia Design  
This course focuses on the integration of multiple forms of media requiring both creative and technical 
skills for visual imagery and messages. Visual media content includes digital photography, video, audio, 
and graphic software for dynamic formats. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3420 Typography  
A study of letter forms, historical influences, and how type is used as an effective element in context of 
visual communication design. Prerequisite:  VCD 2310. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3480 Visual Narrative  
Focusing on artist as author, this course examines the visual and structural components of sequential 
storytelling. Students will develop skills in creating storyboards, pictorial outlines, or scripted narratives 
for the production of visual stories utilizing a chosen medium in their major area of focus such as: 
illustration, photography, design, media/digital arts, video/film. Students will explore historical and 
contemporary issues from multiple perspectives and create visual stories for a variety of audiences. 
Prerequisite ART 2110 or permission of instructor. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3510 Visual Communication Design II  
This studio design course explores tools and techniques for digital-based imaging, editing, and layout.  
Utilizing Adobe software, this course continues the development of visual skills through graphics file 
preparation. Technical processes for digital and print production will be introduced. Prerequisite VCD 
2310. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3420 Typography II 
Advanced study of letter forms and historical contexts utilized in advanced application for visual 
communication design resolution. Prerequisite: VCD 3420. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3700 Visual Communication Design III 
This course examines concept, ideation, metaphor, symbolism, and semiotics within commercial and 
non-commercial visual design applications. Students will analyze form and content for embedded 
contextual meaning as a method for evaluating and making informed design decisions. Prerequisite: VCD 
3510. Three hours. 
 
VCD 3840 Selected Topics in Art/Design  
Advanced level course that examines contemporary issues within the context of the student’s major 
focus and results in a specialized product for the student's portfolio and senior thesis exhibit. Three 
hours. 
 
VCD 4420 Senior Art/Design Portfolio  
A senior capstone course for students majoring in any of the following visual arts including art and visual 
culture, eco-art (ecological art), media arts, photography, and visual communication design. The focus 
will be on executing individual stylistic approaches in reaching visual communication goals for the final 
senior portfolio, thesis exhibit, and installation. Three hours. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
VCD 4480 Advanced Visual Communication Design  
This course provides students with advanced research, practice, and development of a product for the 
professional portfolio. In context of understanding the viewer’s response to the final visual form, 
students will examine a variety of social, cultural, and economic contexts that will inform the meaning of 
the final visual work. Prerequisites: VCD 3700 or ART 3720. Three hours. 
 
VCD 4730 Visual Communication Design Internship  
Qualified visual arts majors receive on-the-job training at a cooperating organization. Prerequisite: 
approval by program director and/or department chair. Three hours. 
  
WMU 1300 Worship Music Theory Fundamentals 
Designed to give the musical worship leader a basic knowledge of music fundamentals, this course is 
balanced around written theory, ear training, and keyboard proficiency. Focus will include basic music 
notation, scales, tonality, keys/modes, intervals, and chords. Prerequisite: placement or permission of 
instructor or program director. Three hours. 
 
WMU 2460 Introduction to Recording  
Provides students with the tools and hands-on experience necessary for producing professional MIDI 
projects, audio tracks, and visual recordings. Introduction to multi-track recording, recording studios, 
and the technology involved in mixing and processing sound. Live event to take place within worship 
environment. Prerequisites: WMU 2600. Three hours. 
 
WMU 2500 Songwriting 
This course examines the basic elements of contemporary music composition including form study, 
melody/lyric construction, and harmonic/rhythmic patterns. Each student will receive instruction in 
various musical styles with specific emphasis on worship songs for the local church. Three hours. 
 
WMU 2600 Worship Music Theory I 
A continuation of Music Theory Fundamentals with strong emphasis on diatonic triads, writing melodies, 
and part writing. Ear training and keyboard proficiency will also be included. Prerequisite: WMU 1300. 
Three hours. 
 
WMU 2610 Worship Planning and Administration  
Students study and implement strategies for successful planning in worship arts ministry. Emphasis will 
be given to aspects of biblical leadership, pastoral ministry, and business administration. Topics include 
scheduling, working with volunteers, budgeting, vision development, worship team dynamics, and long-
term ministry growth plans. Three hours. 
 
WMU 2700 Lighting and Live Production  
Students will acquire basic theories and practices of lighting for stage, theatre, and live production. 
Covered topics will include energy needs, focusing, optics, moving lights, color theory, and various 
control surfaces. Three hours. 
 
WMU 2800 Live Sound Production  
Students will learn signal flow through sound reinforcement systems. Basics of acoustics and room 
design will be investigated. Use of real-time analyzing software and basic equipment diagnosis will be 
investigated. Hands on mixing opportunities will be given on industry standard equipment. Students will 

 
 
 
 
 
 
gain skills in running audio for different settings and develop problem solving skills to resolve audio-
related issues. Three hours. 
 
WMU 3100 Worship Music Theory II 
A continuation of Music Theory I with strong emphasis on harmonic progression and part writing. Ear 
training and keyboard proficiency will also be included. Prerequisite: WMU 2600. Three hours 
 
WMU 2001 (Lab 1); WMU 2002 (Lab 2); WWMU 3001 (Lab 3); WMU 3002 (Lab 4); WMU 4001 
(Lab 5); WMU 4002 (Lab 6)  
Performance Development and Lessons: Labs 1-6 
Required of all students majoring or minoring in Worship Arts or Music Production and the Music Arts 
minor. Performance development encompasses a wide variety of practice and performance experiences 
including co-curricular opportunities such as ensembles and worship teams. A weekly, 1 hour music lab 
allows students the opportunity to perform for their peers and receive constructive remarks regarding 
technique, interpretation, and general performance procedures by the faculty.  
  
Private lessons count toward accumulated practice time as assigned by the instructor for individual 
student performance development goals. Performance development experiences may include choir, 
gospel choir, wind ensemble, string ensemble, or worship teams. Labs 1-6 required for major; Labs 1 and 
2 required for minor. Weekly practice hours assigned by instructor. Three hours per lab. 
 
WMU 3385 Studio Management/Multimedia Law 
Students will study the basic aspects of managing a multimedia studio. This course examines intellectual 
property laws and litigation in the United States relevant to multimedia developers, performing and 
visual artists. Three hours. 
 
WMU 3400 Worship Music Theory III 
A continuation of Music Theory II with strong emphasis on part writing, cadences, non chord tones, and 
modulation techniques. Ear training and keyboard proficiency will also be included. Prerequisite: WMU 
3100. Three hours 
 
WMU 3510 Worship Arts Technology 
Introduction to the technological resources basic to work in the Worship Arts environment including 
lighting, audio, and video. Includes hands-on experience with MIDI and sequencing, music notation 
programs, desktop publishing, digital sound formats, as well as basic lighting design and video 
shooting/editing. Prerequisites: WMU 2600 and WMU 3100. Three hours.   
 
WMU 3770 History of Christian Worship  
This course provides an historical overview of Christian worship. Historical traditions and current trends 
of worship ministry will be studied, including music styles and the broader role of the arts in the local 
church. The interaction between worship and today’s culture will also be addressed. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2800 Selected Topics in Worship Music 
Selected topics in Worship Music offered on an as-available basis. Content includes research, field 
experience, and a music product. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4100 Arranging 
A continuation of WMU 3100 Worship Music Theory II in which students apply concepts learned by 
working on projects in transcription (adapting music composed for one musical medium to a different 
medium), music arrangements (free treatment of pre-existing material), and composition utilizing MIDI 
keyboards and recording software. Prerequisites: WMU 2600 and WMU 3100. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4200 Biblical Theology of Worship Arts  
This course is a study of the biblical and theological aspects of worship. A wide spectrum of Christian 
traditions will be studied as well as the relationship of personal to corporate worship. Emphasis will be 
given to understanding how the patterns of worship found in the Bible affect every aspect of the 
worship service. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4230 Worship Music Integrations 
Advanced level synthesis in performing, developing, producing, or presenting worship arts content or 
forms. Cross-discipline or community integration would result in performing arts evidence utilized in a 
final portfolio or public presentation. Prerequisite: permission of program director. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4300 Advanced Studio Recording 
Provides students with the tools and hands-on experience for working in a professional recording studio. 
Students will learn microphone placement for a wide range of instruments, as well as tracking and 
mixing in Pro Tools. Students will be equipped to record a wide range of projects from live bands to 
music and film. Prerequisite: WMU 2460 Intro to Recording (formerly WMU 2450). Three hours. 
 
WMU 4350 Musical Improvisation  
Students apply knowledge gained from Theory I and II, learning different approaches to using scales to 
improvise over chord progressions. There will be a focus on blues and jazz styles as well as 
contemporary music. Students will learn to transcribe solos from recordings. Prerequisites: WMU 2600, 
WMU 3100, and WMU 4100. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4400 Advanced Recording II 
This course builds on advanced recording, allowing students hands on experience working within a 
professional studio environment. Prerequisite: WMU 4300. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4490 Methods Keyboard, Voice, Guitar, Percussion 
Worship leaders and directors need to have a basic understanding of how all the instruments function in 
a worship team. Focus is on the elementary principles of playing keyboard, voice, guitar, and percussion. 
Emphasis is on development of tone production of each instrument, as well as transposition and the 
capabilities and limitations of each instrument. Prerequisites: WMU 2600 and WMU 3100. Three hours.   
 
WMU 4550 Nashville – Contemporary Music Center 
The course of study for a Fall or Spring semester at the Contemporary Music Center (CMC) is offered 
through the Council for Christian Colleges and Universities (CCCU) GlobalEd program. A total of sixteen 
credit hours are taken on location in Nashville, TN.  All other credits in the Worship Arts major are taken 
at Winona Lake, Grace campus.  Prerequisite: Junior or Senior academic level. Sixteen hours. 


WMU 4620 Senior Capstone  
Presentation of a corporate worship service representing significant research and creative endeavor 
during the academic year preceding graduation. Presentation projects must be approved by the 
program director, department chair, and faculty adviser. Program notes must be submitted to and 
approved by the program director prior to the presentation. Student is responsible for assembling the 
necessary team to execute the live event (musicians, speakers, etc.). Prerequisites: completion of major 
course requirements and approval of department chair. Three hours. 
 
WMU 4730 Worship Arts Internship 
An internship served under the guidance of an experienced and qualified worship arts leader in an 
approved church music program. Prerequisite: permission of program director. Three hours.  
 
WMU 4830 Advanced Individual Studies in Worship Arts 
This advanced level worship performance or worship production-based research course focuses on an 
individual topic selected by the student. Prerequisite: completion of major course requirements, 
approval of research proposal, and permission of program director and department chair. Three hours. 

 
 

 
ENGINEERING FUNDAMENTALS 
 
MEG 1000 Engineering Service  
This course will allow the student to perform actual service using their engineering skills before 
graduation. These service activities could include a variety tasks including helping with engineering 
education in the surrounding school systems, performing engineering work for non-profits, or other 
ways to make the world a better place using their growing engineering skills.  Faculty approval is needed 
for each student’s engineering service project. A minimum recommendation for hours of service is 10. 
Zero hours. 
 
MEG 1200 Introduction to Mechanical Engineering 
This course will give an overview of the mechanical engineering profession, introduce key skills used in 
engineering, including problem solving, the design process, and quickly give an overview of Mechanical 
engineering sciences, including an introduction into basic statics and free-body diagrams. Hands-on 
laboratory activities, such as 3D printing, digital scanning, and mechanical tensile testing, will also be 
performed in this course to give the students a well-rounded engineering introduction. Four hours. 
 
MEG 1400 Introduction to Programming in MATLAB 
This course will begin with an introduction to basic programming including programming structure, 
variables, and loops. In this course, programming will be used to perform mechanical functions using 
various equipment. This course will also include an introduction to numerical methods for solving 
engineering problems. Prerequisite: MAT 1230/1240. Two hours. 
 
MEG 1900 Engineering Modeling and Tolerancing 
This course will teach graphical communication for engineers starting with the fundamentals of 
engineering drawings, then work significantly on 3D model creation, and end with an introduction to 
geometric dimensioning and tolerancing. Emphasis is placed on developing the skills needed for 
mechanical engineering design. Each student will design their own part or mechanism based on given 
design inputs. This project will be built in MEG 1950. Three hours. 
 
MEG 1950 Industrial Machining and Measurements 
This course will begin with machine shop safety and then teach the processes of running a manual mill 
and lathe and other common machining tools. Students will use these new skills to build their device 
that was designed in MEG 1900. The second portion of the course will focus on measurements of 
parameters key to design and manufacturing. Prerequisite: MEG 1900. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2000 Engineering Internship  
This course will include journaling, self and manager assessments, and other activities during an 
internship working as a professional engineer. One hour. 
 
 
 

 
MEG 2800 Kinematics and Linkage Design  
Study of the kinematics and kinetics of machines and mechanisms. Topics will include displacement, 
velocity, and acceleration analysis of linkage and cam mechanisms by graphical and analytical methods. 
Also covered are synthesis of mechanisms, gears, and gear trains. Design projects are normally required. 
Prerequisites: MAT 2280 and MEG 2200. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2900 Machine Component Design 
Review of stress/strain and force/deflection relationships. Introduction to static and dynamic failure 
theories. Discussion of design and selection of some machine elements. Design projects are normally 
required. Prerequisite: MEG 2100. Three hours. 
 
MEG 3100 Experimental Methods and Sensors 
This lecture and lab course will develop a basic understanding of the use of common engineering 
sensors in experimental and design applications. Introduction to sensors for the measurement of 
temperature, pressure, stress/strain, position and flow is accompanied by application of sensor signals 
including signal conditioning, filtering, and acquisition and processing. Experimental planning and 
execution fundamentals are covered as well as data analysis and statistical evaluation of experimental 
data. Computer based acquisition and analysis methods are directly experienced by hands on lab work. 
Prerequisite: MEG 2400. Three hours. 
 
MEG 3200 Control Systems 
This course will present the following concepts: basic elements of continuous-time signals and systems; 
differential equation models of systems; Fourier series and Fourier transforms; system response to 
periodic inputs; Laplace transforms; transfer functions and stability analysis. The final project typically 
involves design and tuning of an electromechanical and/or electrohydraulic motion control system. 
Prerequisites: MEG 1400, MEG 2400, and MAT 2280. Three hours. 
 
MEG 3300 Advanced Manufacturing  
This course will introduce different advanced manufacturing methods and introduce the students to 
CNC machining. Tools will be introduced that can be used to analyze and improve manufacturing 
processes. Prerequisite: MEG 1950. Two hours. 
 
MEG 3400 Introduction to Finite-Element Analysis  
Introduction to linear and nonlinear programming, and numerical techniques for solving mechanical 
problems. Introduction to finite-element analysis and optimization to engineering design using 
commercial software such as ANSYS. Prerequisites: MEG 2300 and MEG 2900. Three hours. 
 
MEG 4100 Senior Engineering Project  
As part of the capstone engineering experience, students will work on projects that may be derived from 
industry sources or other integrated design problems. Projects may be undertaken by individuals or 
teams, and may be interdisciplinary or specific to an area of concentration. Prerequisite: Senior standing 
in the engineering program. Three hours each in consecutive fall and spring semesters, six hours total. 
 
 
MEG 2100 Statics and Mechanics of Materials 
This course combines statics and mechanics of materials into one course. The statics subjects 
covered include; force and moment vectors, equivalent systems, trusses, frames, and machines, 
equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies, static friction, centroids and moments of inertia. The 
mechanics of materials section teaches the concepts of stress and strain in engineering 
materials. Subjects in this section include: Hooke’s law and Poisson’s relationship; analysis of 
axial, shear, flexural, and torsional stresses; combined stress; shear and moment distribution in 
beams; and deformation of structural members. Co-requisites: PHY 2240/2250 and MAT 1250. 
Four hours. 
 
MEG 2200 Dynamics  
Introduction to particle and rigid-body kinematics and kinetics; motion analysis; work-energy and 
momentum methods; engineering applications; and, vibrations. Prerequisites: MEG 2100. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2300 Engineering Materials  
Introduction to common materials utilized in engineering applications. Content covered includes the 
primary types of materials (metals, ceramics, and polymers) and composites. Students learn the 
fundamental principles of material structure and relationship to properties as well as manufacture and 
application of those materials to engineering solutions. Prerequisite: CHM 1610/1620. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2400 Electrical Science (Circuits)  
Analysis of linear networks, AC and DC electric circuits that involve multiple independent sources, using 
Ohm's Law, Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws, Thévenin's and Norton's theorems, and the maximum 
power transfer theorem. Also explored is the steady state and transient behavior of capacitors and 
inductors. Includes laboratory experience. Prerequisite: MAT 1230/1240. Four hours. 
 
MEG 2500 Thermodynamics  
Introduction to the thermal-fluid sciences, beginning with a classical macroscopic study of energy, its 
forms and transformations, and the interactions of energy with matter, including properties of pure 
substances, the first and second laws of thermodynamics, entropy, power cycles, vapor cycles, 
refrigeration cycles, gas mixtures, and chemical reactions. Prerequisite: MEG 2100. Four hours. 
 
MEG 2600 Heat Transfer  
Introduction to heat transfer by conduction, convection, and radiation and applications to heat 
exchanges, ducts and pipes, surfaces, phase exchanges, and mass transfer, and heat transfer processes. 
Prerequisites: MEG 2500 and MEG 2700. Three hours. 
 
MEG 2700 Fluid Mechanics 
Introduction to Newtonian fluids; statics, continuity, momentum, and energy principles; dimensional 
analysis and similarity; laminar and turbulent, incompressible, internal and external, viscous flow; 
boundary layers; and the basics of pumps and fluid systems. Prerequisites: MAT 2250 and MEG 2200. 
Three hours. 
 
 

 
TECHNICAL ELECTIVES 
 
MEG 3010, 3020, 3030 Special Topics in Engineering 
Study of advanced subjects in engineering science and practice. May involve intermediate or advanced 
study of prerequisite introductory courses. Topics may vary from one semester to the next based on 
student interests and the availability of qualified faculty. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing in 
engineering or instructor permission. One to three hours, repeatable. 
 
MEG 3500 Orthopedic Biomechanics 
The human musculoskeletal system will be investigated and then evaluated as a mechanical system. 
Experimental data and research documents will be used to solve different biomechanical problems.  An 
introduction to orthopedic implant science will also be included. Prerequisite: MEG 2900. Three hours. 
 
MEG 3600 Robotics 
This course provides an overview of robot mechanisms, dynamics, and intelligent controls. Topics 
include planar and spatial kinematics, and motion planning; mechanism design for manipulators and 
mobile robots, multi-rigid-body dynamics, 3D graphic simulation; control design, actuators, and sensors. 
Training and certification on a KUKA 6-axis educational robot will be included in this course. 
Prerequisites: MEG 2800, MEG 3100, and MEG 3200. Three hours. 


BIO 1010 Bioscience Survey  
A broad overview of living organisms, their structure, function, and relationships to their non-living 
environment, to each other, and to humans. Special attention is given to cellular biology as it applies to 
both lower and higher forms of life. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 1020 Bioscience Survey 
Laboratory. (Credit will not be given for both BIO 1010 and BIO 1610). Three hours. 
BIO 1020 Bioscience Survey Laboratory  
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 1010 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 1200 Medical Terminology  
Students will focus on building core medical vocabulary by analyzing their prefix, suffix, root, connecting 
and combining forms. Through such analysis, students gain an understanding of the human body’s 
structure, function and diseases. Three hours.  
BIO 1610 General Biology I 
Principles of structure, function, and cellular organisms. Includes an introduction to the scientific 
method, characteristics of cytoplasm, and basic cytology, energy acquisition and release and heredity. 
Also includes basic plant structure and function. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 1620. Four 
hours. 
BIO 1620 General Biology I Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 1610 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 1710 General Biology II 
A continuation of BIO 1610. Includes structure, function and interrelationships of the organ systems of 
animals with particular attention to the human body. Also includes introductory taxonomy, surveying 
the major groups of plants and animals. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or permission of the instructor. 
Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 1720. Four hours. 
BIO 1720 General Biology II Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 1710 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 2010 Anatomy and Physiology I 
This course is designed for students pursuing a career in an allied health field (nursing, health and 
wellness, etc.) The class includes the study of basic gross and microscopic anatomy and the function of 
the body on cellular, tissue, and organ system levels. The class will include organization of the body, 
cytology, basic histology, and the study of several organ systems – integumentary, skeletal, muscular, 
nervous, and endocrine. Remaining body systems including – circulatory, respiratory, digestive, urinary, 
and reproductive to be covered in course BIO 2040. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 2020. Four 
hours. 
 
 


 
BIO 2020 Anatomy and Physiology I Lab 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 2010 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs.  
BIO 2040 Anatomy and Physiology II 
This course is designed for students pursuing a career in an allied health field (nursing, health and 
wellness, etc.) This course includes a basic study of the gross and microscopic structure of several major 
organ systems – endocrine, circulatory, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive. The other body 
systems including – integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous, and endocrine to be covered in course 
BIO 2010. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 2050. Four hours. 
BIO 2050 Anatomy and Physiology II Lab 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 2040 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 2100 Health Sciences Seminar 
An overview of the health professions, as presented by current practicing medical professionals. 
Includes occupations ranging from nurse to medical doctor to veterinarian to chiropractor, with many 
others included. Prerequisites: BIO 1610/1620 and BIO 1710/1720, or consent of the instructor. One 
hour. 
BIO 2110 General Ecology  
A study of the interaction of organisms with their physical environment and with each other. Particular 
focus will be on application of ecological concepts and field work in various local ecosystems. Students 
must enroll concurrently in BIO 2120. Four hours. (Cross-listed; register as ENV 2110.) 
BIO 2120 General Ecology Lab 
This laboratory is designed to support BIO 2110 and must be taken concurrently with the course. (Cross-
listed; register as ENV 2120.) This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 2210 Principles of Nutrition 
Functions and interrelationships of food nutrients throughout the life cycle of man. Includes digestion, 
absorption and metabolism of nutrients, as well as dietary evaluation and modification for physiological 
needs. Other areas of study include: role of social, psychological and cultural factors in food selection. 
Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or consent of the biology program director. Three hours. 
BIO 2240 Intro to Public Health 
This is an introductory course in public health designed for students pursuing careers in healthcare. 
Various aspects of public health are explored, including: infection disease; psychosocial behavior; 
environmental issues; and governmental policy-making. Epidemiological approaches to understanding 
public health data feature prominently throughout the course. Pre-requisite: MAT 3200. Three hours. 
BIO 2310 Biochemistry 
A study of the basic composition, function and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins. 
Emphasis is placed on the catalytic function and regulation of enzymes, and on the process of cellular 
respiration. Some consideration given to the role of nucleic acids in cellular metabolism. The course 
includes hands-on laboratory experiments involving current procedures in biochemistry. This course has 
a fee for consumables used in its labs. Prerequisite: CHM 1710/1720 and BIO 1610/1620, or consent of 
instructor. Three hours. 


 
BIO 2410 Plant Biology 
Integrated study of plants as organisms. Deals with plant structure, physiology, development, genetics, 
ecology, and classification of major plant groups. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or consent of the 
instructor. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 2420. Four hours. 
BIO 2420 Plant Biology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 2410 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 2510 Animal Biology 
Integrated study of animals as organisms. Deals with animal structure, physiology, development, 
genetics, ecology, and classification of major animal groups. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or consent of 
the instructor. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 2520. Four hours. 
BIO 2520 Animal Biology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 2510 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs.  
BIO 2700 Introduction to Microbiology 
An organ systems approach to the study of disease-related microorganisms intended for the nursing 
major. The foundations of microbiology are presented through the lens of disease processes as 
bacterial, viral and parasitic infections relevant to health professionals are explored. Other course topics 
include: host-parasite interaction; virulence factors; hospital and community acquired infections; 
mechanisms of gene transfer; disinfection; antimicrobial drugs; and, immunology. Prerequisite: BIO 
1010/1020; or BIO 1610/1620; or BIO 2010/2020; or consent of the instructor. Students must enroll 
concurrently in BIO 2710. Four hours. 
 
BIO 2710 Introduction to Microbiology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 2700 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs.  
BIO 2810-2830 Healthcare Experience 
This course requires 40 hours per credit of active participation in providing healthcare as a trained 
healthcare worker per credit earned, during which time the student will better understand the roles in 
medicine and the art of interacting with patients in a healthcare setting. This could include serving as a 
Certified Nursing Assistant, Patient Care Technician, Pharmacy Technician, Occupational Therapy or 
Physical Therapy Aide, etc. Several of these require outside licensing and training that is to be pursued 
by the student independently. As these are paid occupations, securing employment in such positions is 
the student’s responsibility. If this course is taken more than once, the same occupation and position 
may be used for subsequent enrollments. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 and BIO 1710/1720, or consent 
of the instructor. One to three hours. 
 
BIO 2850, 2860 and 2870 Healthcare Observation 1, 2, 3 
Each of these courses requires 40 hours of shadowing a healthcare professional in the area of the 
student’s desired future occupation, during which time the student will become more familiar with the 
specifics of the career. Shadowing may require that the student be vetted through the volunteer process 
of a healthcare facility (may include an application, drug screening and/or health testing, which are the 
student’s responsibility to complete). A different healthcare professional must be shadowed for each 


 
course; the intent is that the student completes all 3 courses to fulfill the required 3 credits of practical 
experience (the shadowed medical practitioners may be in the same profession). Prerequisite: BIO 
1610/1620 and BIO 1710/1720, or consent of the instructor. The courses may be taken concurrently. 
One hour per course. 
 
BIO 2910-2930 Biology Internship 
This course is designed to award college credit to students who participate in a life science internship. 
Internship opportunities can range from working alongside zookeepers and wildlife managers to 
participating in bench science at Q/A and research laboratories. Students must commit to a total of 40 
hours per credit at the internship site which can also include the time needed for completing the 
required internship journal assignments. Students are responsible for providing their own transportation 
during the duration of the internship opportunity and must complete an off-campus safety training 
course prior to starting the internship. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 and BIO 1710/1720, or consent of 
the instructor. One to three hours. 
 
BIO 3110 Cell and Molecular Biology 
A study of the basic principles that guide cellular composition, organization and function. Particular 
attention will be paid to understanding the molecular mechanism that underlies cell function. Topics 
studied in the course include, processes of energy extraction, membrane transport, cell surface 
communication, cell cycle and regulation, cell division, along with the study of specialized cells like 
gametes, lymphocytes, neurons, muscle cells, and cancer cells. The course includes hands-on laboratory 
experiments involving current procedures in cell and molecular biology. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. Prerequisite: BIO 2310 or consent of the instructor. Three hours.  
BIO 3210 Advanced Anatomy and Physiology I 
This course is designed for students preparing for graduate studies in biology/medically related 
programs (medicine, physical therapy, pharmacy, veterinary medicine, etc.). The class includes an in-
depth look at organization of the human body, cytology, histology, and the study of several of the major 
organ systems – integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous, and endocrine. A detailed study of the 
remaining body systems including – circulatory, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive to be 
covered in course BIO 3310/3320. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 3220. Prerequisites: BIO 
1710/1720 or consent of the instructor. Four hours. 
BIO 3220 Advanced Anatomy and Physiology I Lab 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 3210 and must be taken concurrently with the course.  This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs.  
BIO 3310 Advanced Anatomy and Physiology II 
This course is designed for students preparing for graduate studies in biology/medically related 
programs (medicine, physical therapy, pharmacy, veterinary medicine, etc.). This course includes an in 
depth study of the gross and microscopic structure of several major organ systems – endocrine, 
circulatory, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive. A detailed study of the other body systems 
including –integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous, and endocrine to be covered in course BIO 
3210/3220. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 3320. Prerequisites: BIO 1710/1720 or consent of 
the instructor. Four hours. 
 
 
 


 
BIO 3320 Advanced Anatomy and Physiology II Lab 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 3310 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 3710 Pathophysiology 
This course covers the biological basis for disease within the human body. Pathological conditions are 
presented by organ system, including disorders caused by injury, infection, deficiency, and genetics. A 
review of basic anatomy and physiology is included with each body system in order to contrast normal 
and diseased states of tissues and organs. The origin of each disease is analyzed down to a cellular or 
tissue level to provide root understanding of the cause of human disease. Prerequisite: BIO 1710/1720 
or BIO 2040/2050. Three hours. 
BIO 3810-3830 Readings in Biological Science 
This course is designed to allow the student a more in-depth investigation of a topic of special interest in 
the areas of biological science. Prerequisite: permission of the individual instructor. One to three hours; 
non-repeatable. 
BIO 3910-3940 Independent Study in Biological Science 
Topics or projects to be chosen and investigated in the areas of biological science in consultation with 
the individual instructor. Prerequisite: permission of the biology program director. One to four hours, 
non-repeatable. 
BIO 4010 Biology Senior Seminar 
This course is designed as a capstone course for science majors and is meant to teach valuable skills and 
give experience with tools needed for science careers or post-graduate education. Coursework is 
designed to challenge the student to integrate their current biological knowledge with a Biblical 
worldview, as well as to consider their future role as a Christ-follower in the workforce. Prerequisites: 
BIO 2310 and senior class standing, or consent of the instructor. Three hours. 
BIO 4110 Microbiology 
An introductory study of microorganisms dealing with the morphology, physiology and cultivation and 
identification of microbes and their role in the environment. Other areas studied include: immunology, 
genetics, metabolism, food, preservation, and diseases. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 and BIO 
1710/1720, or consent of the instructor. Students must enroll concurrently in BIO 4120. Four hours. 
BIO 4120 Microbiology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support BIO 4110 and must be taken concurrently with the course.  This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
BIO 4210 Genetics 
A study of both in-depth classical genetics and underlying molecular mechanisms; also genetic 
mechanisms and processes, recombination, genetic interaction, and gene regulation. The process of 
expression of genetic information through protein synthesis is also considered in depth. The 
course includes hands-on laboratory experiments involving current procedures in molecular genetics.  
This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. Prerequisite: BIO 2310 or consent of the 
instructor. Three hours. 
 
 


 
BIO 4810-4830 Research in Biological Science 
A course designed to give the student an opportunity to do individual research on special problems in 
biology. Prerequisite: BIO 1710 and BIO 2310 or consent of the biology program director. One to three 
hours. Maximum of six hours permitted. 
 
CHEMISTRY 
CHM 1010 Introduction to Chemistry 
This course is designed to give the student a broad introduction to general, organic, and biological 
chemistry. The lecture emphasizes general chemical concepts while the laboratory concentrates on 
techniques and data handling. Students must enroll concurrently in CHM 1020. Four hours.  
CHM 1020 Introduction to Chemistry Lab  
Designed to support CHM 1010 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee 
for consumables used in its labs. 
CHM 1610 General Chemistry I  
This course is designed to investigate all topics normally found within the American Chemistry Society 
recommended guidelines (i.e., atomic structure, physical measurements, chemical reactions and 
balancing equations, percent composition, solubility and precipitation, redox chemistry, gas laws, 
thermochemistry, quantum chemistry, VSEPR theory, molecular orbital theory, unit cells and unit cell 
calculation, and intermolecular forces) for a first-semester freshmen chemistry course. Students must 
enroll concurrently in CHM 1620. Four hours. 
CHM 1620 General Chemistry I Lab  
General Chemistry I Lab investigates many of the concepts discussed in CHM 1610 and re-enforces the 
student’s applied learning. Students must enroll concurrently in CHM 1610. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
CHM 1710 General Chemistry II 
This is the second part of a two-semester sequence in general chemistry. This course studies and 
problem solves topics in solution chemistry, chemical kinetics, chemical equilibria, thermodynamics, 
acid-base equilibria, electrochemistry, and an introduction to organic chemistry. Prerequisite: CHM 
1610/1620. Students must enroll concurrently in CHM 1720. Four hours. 
CHM 1720 General Chemistry II Lab  
General Chemistry II Lab focuses on the van’t Hoff factor and its effect on boiling point elevation, 
chemical kinetics of a combustion reaction, chemical equilibria and reaction rates, synthesis of biodiesel, 
electrochemical cells, oxidation-reduction, and testing functional groups of organic compounds. 
Students must enroll concurrently in CHM 1710. This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
CHM 2300 Forensic Chemistry 
This is a descriptive course covering the wide spectrum of current forensic chemistry and its application 
in criminal investigations. Drugs, drugs as physical evidence, seized drugs and their analysis, and 
selected drug classes are investigated. Drugs in the body, and the chemistry of combustion and arson, 
explosives, and firearms are also covered. Quantitative reasoning is utilized in the form of scientific units 
(e.g., dosage) and in oxygen balance calculations (i.e., explosives). Discussion boards and documented 
case studies re-enforce the material covered. Three hours. 


 
CHM 2610 Organic Chemistry I  
This is a first part of a two-semester sequence in organic chemistry. Fundamentals of organic chemistry 
will be studied which include atomic structure, functional groups, acid-base chemistry, chemical 
nomenclature, alkane conformations (Newman configurations, chair conformations), SN2/SN1/E2/E1 
reactions and their mechanisms, alkene reactions and mechanisms, radical reactions and their 
mechanism and general physical and chemical properties of all organic compounds presented herein. 
Additionally, FT-IR, 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectroscopy will be investigated along with mass 
spectrometry. Prerequisite: CHM 1710/1720. Students must enroll concurrently in CHM 2620. Four 
hours. 
CHM 2620 Organic Chemistry I Lab  
The lab component will cover essential organic chemistry skills that include (but are not limited to) 
melting point determination, acid-base extraction, aqueous extraction, thin-layer chromatography, FT-
IR, 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectroscopic analysis and synthesis, isolation, purification, and 
characterization of a complex organic heterocycle. Must be taken concurrently with CHM 2610. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
CHM 2710 Organic Chemistry II  
This is the second part of a two-part sequence in organic chemistry. Reactions and mechanisms are 
covered for alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, carboxylic acids, carboxylic acid derivatives, aromatic EAS and 
NAS reactions, alpha-carbonyl chemistry, and amine chemistry. 1H and 13C NMR and IR spectroscopy and 
MS are heavily utilized. Special topics will include amino acid and nucleic acid chemistry.  Students must 
enroll concurrently in CHM 2720. Four hours. 
CHM 2720 Organic Chemistry II Lab  
This lab course will heavily utilize modern synthetic organic chemistry research techniques and practices 
such as rotary evaporation, Schlenk glassware, vacuum manifold work, TLC and silica purification 
techniques, and recrystallization. Purified organic compounds will be analyzed by 1H and 13C NMR and IR 
spectroscopy using instrument within our department as well as out-sourcing to an external research 
laboratory. Must be taken concurrently with CHM 2710. This course has a fee for consumables used in 
its labs. 
CHM 3610 Environmental Analytical Chemistry 
This course has two parts: analytical chemistry and environmental chemistry. In the analytical portion of 
this course the student will be expected to master chemical measurements, experimental error, 
chemical equilibria, titrations, electrochemistry, and redox titrations. Additionally, the student will be 
introduced to environmental problems, sustainability, and green chemistry. Topics of interests will 
include air-pollution, global warming, fossil fuels, CO2 emissions, biofuels and renewable energy, water 
chemistry and eater pollution, use and misuse of nuclear energy, heavy metals, and pesticides and the 
problems they cause. Within the context of environmental challenges, analytical chemical techniques 
and practices are introduced. The class will investigate the environmental disasters experienced by 
Chernobyl, the Gulf of Mexico, and Three Mile Island. Statistical data analysis as well as analytical 
techniques and experiments in acid-base titration, buffer solutions, determining an equilibrium 
constant, potentiometry, electrochemistry, and liquid chromatography are investigated. Pre-requisites:  
CHM 1710/1720. Three hours. This course has a fee for consumables used in its lecture-based labs. 
 
 


 
CHM 3400 Selected Topics in Chemistry 
A course designed to give the student an in-depth study of some specific aspects of chemistry not 
normally covered in other required courses. Course topics will fluctuate with student needs and 
interests. Prerequisite: dependent on topic; see instructor. Two hours. 
 
CHM 4530 Independent Study in Chemistry: Advanced Organic Chemistry 
This course is designed to offer chemistry and other science majors an option to explore an upper-level 
advanced organic chemistry experience. This independent study requires the student to investigate and 
master several advanced organic chemistry topics not covered in the typical two-semester sequence of 
organic chemistry. The student is also to deliver a defense of his/her knowledge at a scheduled meeting 
with the professor near the end of the course. The student is expected to pass their defense’s content 
knowledge and problem-solving at 70% or higher. Pre-requisite: CHM 2710/2720. Three hours. 
 
CHM 4610 Physical Chemistry 
In this course in physical chemistry, the student will be introduced to a variety of concepts and critical 
thinking/quantitative problem solving in acceleration, force, pressure, work and energy, the Boltzmann 
distribution, electromagnetic waves, photons, the perfect equation of state, the Maxwell distribution of 
speeds, the virial and van der Waals equation of state. Following this introduction, the student will 
problem solve a variety of physical chemistry topics that include the molecular interpretation of work, 
heat, and temperature, heat influx during expansions, internal energy, enthalpy, entropy and the first 
and second laws of thermodynamics, various entropic calculations, chemical equilibria, 
electrochemistry, and chemical kinetics. Pre-requisite: CHM 2710/2720. Students must enroll 
concurrently in CHM 4620. Four hours. 
 
CHM 4620 Physical Chemistry Lab 
Designed to support CHM 4610 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee 
for consumables used in its labs. 
CHM 4700 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 
The goal of this course is to expose the student to advanced topics and problems in inorganic chemistry. 
This course begins with a review and more in-depth look into inorganic basics of bonding (VSEPR theory, 
Lewis structures, etc.). Symmetry and group theory are also investigated as well as utilizing this work to 
predict IR and Raman bands for spectroscopic analysis. Molecular orbital theory, degenerate orbitals, 
homonuclear and heteronuclear diatomic molecular orbital diagrams will be studied, reproduced, and 
mastered to more fully understand the dual properties of electrons in bonding. Finally, organometallic 
chemistry, the 18-electron rule, and organometallic mechanisms will be explored to predict and 
understand reactions with transition metal complexes. Pre-requisite: CHM 2710/2720. Three hours. 
 
CHM 4710-4730 Internship in Chemistry 
This course is designed to provide the chemistry major an opportunity to gain experience in a chemistry 
lab. The successful student’s internship will likely be in the form of a chemistry laboratory technician 
opportunity found within an industry’s R & D (Research & Development) department or QC (quality 
control), however other positions may also be available. The student is expected to learn the skills 
needed to successfully work within this internship, grow in their responsibilities, keep all company 
information private, and leave the internship with a letter of recommendation from the company’s 
human resource department. This internship is not limited to industry. For instance, the student could 
be a water-quality chemist for our local zoo. One to three hours. 


 
CHM 4810-4830 Research in Chemistry 
A course designed to give the student an opportunity to do individual research in an area of special 
interest in chemistry. A written report or professional presentation of the results at an external meeting 
at the regional or national level is required. Prerequisite: consent of the faculty research advisor. This 
course is designed to train the student in relevant research investigation, problem solving, acquisition of 
scientific data, library research, and dissemination of research results to a broader public. The student is 
expected to become a member of a scientific society or academy and promote their science at local 
and/or regional/national venues. The student is expected to commit 40 hours of research work per 
credit hour earned. This time commitment is fulfilled through laboratory and out-of-lab requirements. 
One to three hours. This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 
ENV 2110 General Ecology 
A study of the interaction of organisms with their physical environment and with each other. Particular 
focus will be on application of ecological concepts and field work in various local ecosystems. Students 
must enroll concurrently in ENV 2120. Four hours. 
ENV 2120 General Ecology Lab 
This laboratory is designed to support ENV 2110 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
   
ENV 2410 Plant Biology 
Integrated study of plants as organisms. Deals with plant structure, physiology, development, genetics, 
ecology, and classification of major plant groups. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or consent of the 
instructor. Students must enroll concurrently in ENV 2420. Four hours. (Cross-listed; register as BIO 
2410.) 
 
ENV 2420 Plant Biology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support ENV 2410 and must be taken concurrently with the course. (Cross-
listed; register as BIO 2420.) This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
ENV 2510 Animal Biology 
Integrated study of animals as organisms. Deals with animal structure, physiology, development, 
genetics, ecology, and classification of major animal groups. Prerequisite: BIO 1610/1620 or consent of 
the instructor. Students must enroll concurrently in ENV 2520. Four hours. (Cross-listed; register as BIO 
2510.) 
ENV 2520 Animal Biology Laboratory 
The laboratory is designed to support ENV 2510 and must be taken concurrently with the course.  
(Cross-listed; register as BIO 2520.) This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
ENV 3210 Aquatic Ecology 
An overview of physical, chemical, and biological components and their interactions in streams and 
lakes. Prerequisite: ENV 2110/2120. Students must enroll concurrently in ENV 3220. Four hours. 


 
ENV 3220 Aquatic Ecology Lab 
This laboratory is designed to support ENV 3210 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
ENV 3410 Environmental Ethics 
An exploratory study of secular and Christian views of the natural world and humanity’s place in it. 
Special attention on practical application of a Biblical stewardship ethic. Prerequisite: 55 credit hours of 
coursework. Three hours. 
 
ENV 4010 Senior Seminar 
This course is designed as a capstone course for science majors and is meant to teach valuable skills and 
give experience with tools needed for science careers or post-graduate education. Prerequisites: BIO 
1610/1620 and senior class standing, or consent of the instructor. Three hours. (Cross-listed; register as 
BIO 4010.) 
ENV 4210 Genetics 
A study of both in-depth, classical genetics and underlying molecular mechanisms, genetic mechanisms 
and processes, recombination, genetic interaction, and gene regulation. The course includes hands-on 
laboratory experiments involving current procedures in molecular genetics. Prerequisite: BIO 2310 or 
consent of the instructor. Three hours. (Cross-listed; register as BIO 4210.) This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
ENV 4810-4860 Field Education 
Research projects or internships to be chosen in the areas of environmental science and outreach in 
consultation with the instructor. Prerequisite: permission of the environmental science program 
director. One to six hours. 
 
 
EXERCISE SCIENCE 
EXS 1000 Introduction to Exercise Science 
Introduction to Exercise Science is an entry level course that is designed to introduce students to the 
field of exercise science. This course will prepare students with knowledge and information on related 
health topics including: the history of exercise science, fitness assessment, nutrition, biology, exercise 
physiology, biomechanics, physical fitness, career opportunities, and beginning diagnostic tools. Three 
hours.  
 
EXS 1050 Dynamics of Fitness  
This course will investigate major topics in the study of lifestyle management. Topics included are: 
wellness, physical fitness, nutrition, disease, prevention, stress management, and consumerism. Three 
hours.  
 
EXS 2000 Kinesiology 
This course is designed to guide students in the exploration of human anatomy, functional anatomy, 
fundamental movements and select movements. This will include an in-depth examination of the 
musculoskeletal framework through structure, function, and application in sport and exercise. Three 
hours.  
 


 
EXS 2130 Principles of Coaching 
This course is focused on providing a practical guide to coaching. The fundamentals needed to build a 
successful sport, personal training or team/group experience begin with basic principles such as practice 
planning, team building and program development. This class provides instruction to assist the student 
in possessing the skills to lead and coach individuals in their specific field. Three hours. Offered every 
other year.  
 
EXS 2150 Practicum in Exercise Science 
A practical experience rotation in real-world settings. Students observe exercise science professionals in 
their prospective fields, and work on interpersonal skills at rotation settings. Pre-requisite: EXS 1000. 
Two hours. 
 
EXS 2250 Care and Prevention  
Designed to provide information needed to manage the care of athletic injuries—from prevention, 
identification and assessment of injuries to interaction with players, parents and physicians. Geared 
toward those beginning careers in fitness or coaching, equipping them for management and 
implementation of injury and emergency situations. Prerequisites: EXS 2000 or BIO 1710/1720 or BIO 
3210/3220. Three hours. This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
EXS 2300 Nutrition for Life Cycles 
Nutrient requirements and anthropometric aspects of nutrition for the following life stages: prenatal, 
pregnancy, lactation, infancy, childhood, adolescence, adult, and late adulthood. Exploration of the 
influences on the diet of each life cycle, including physiological, psychological, sociological, and cultural 
factors. Pre-requisite: CHM 1010/1020. Three hours. 
EXS 2500 Group Fitness Instruction 
This course prepares students with skill and practice for group fitness instruction. The fundamentals 
needed to build a successful fitness class that engages the individual as well as the group. Students will 
begin building basic principles such as class planning, program development, and strategies for 
modifications or progression of clients. This class positions students for certification in group fitness 
instruction. Three hours. Offered every other year. 
EXS 3000 Strength and Conditioning 
Principles of strength and conditioning draws students into a creative design and implementation of 
exercise for various areas of the body. A large majority of students pursuing careers dealing with 
exercise will encounter prescription weight training and physical conditioning. This course specifically 
addresses form, function, and programming for the upcoming fitness professional. Prerequisite: EXS 
2000. Three hours. 
EXS 3200 Nutrition for Sports Performance 
Supporting and advancing athletic performance through nutritional strategies and therapies. Exploring 
specific nutritional needs among a variety of sports, as well as proper recovery methods and diet 
planning for optimizing body composition, speed, explosive and endurance-based performances. 
Examination of the risks and benefits of ergogenic supplements found in fitness and details concerning 
the effects of eating disorders. Students will frequently practice planning and strategizing diet and 
recovery methods for various sports and athlete profiles. Prerequisite: BIO 2210. Three hours. 
 


 
EXS 3280 Nutrition for Health and Disease 
This course examines the biochemical relationship between food and chronic illness and introduces the 
use of nutrition as an intervention for pathological conditions, encompassing the complex relationship 
between nutrients and human cells. Additional focus includes the human microbiome, as well as 
nutrigenetics – how personal genetics impact nutrient uptake and utilization – and nutrigenomics – how 
food components impact genetic expression. Prerequisites: BIO 2210 and CHM 1010/1020. Three hours. 
EXS 3240 Diet Planning and Counseling 
This course evaluates current methodologies and professional techniques used to assess an individual’s 
nutritional status, lifestyle, and diet planning abilities. Students explore the utilization of nutritionally 
therapeutic interventions for disease prevention, counseling techniques for client support, building 
counselor-client rapport, and proper diet care documentation. Laboratory experience will provide 
numerous hands-on assessment opportunities and planning experiences. Prerequisite: EXS 3280. Three 
hours. 
EXS 3300 Special Topics in Fitness 
This course addresses the wide variety of fitness trends rapidly entering the fitness market space. In a 
hands-on learning approach, students will learn to engage, experiment, and practice these fitness topics 
with guidance, empowering students to incorporate different trends and topics into their repertoire as 
fitness professionals. Three hours. Offered every other year. 
 
EXS 3600 Fitness Assessment  
This course prepares students to understand the fundamentals of proper fitness assessment and 
development of prescriptive exercise. The focus of the course is placed on assessment methodology, 
developing skills with modern test equipment, and incorporating collected data into exercise programs. 
Prerequisite: BIO 1710/1720. Three hours. This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
EXS 3750 Exercise Cardiology 
The design of the course is geared toward an in-depth study of the anatomy of the heart. Students will 
engage in assessment and testing of the heart in a resting and active state. An examination of 
abnormalities found in general, athletic, pediatric, women, and special populations. ECG testing and 
equipment skills proficiency along with data interpretation will be included as well. Prerequisites: BIO 
2010/2020, or BIO 3210/3220. Three hours. This course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
EXS 4180 Exercise Physiology 
This course examines the structural components of the musculoskeletal, nervous, cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and endocrine systems. In addition, there is a comprehensive review of the body’s response 
to exercise, optimal work capacity during exercise training, and limitations due to environmental factors, 
age, sex, and physical health. Prerequisites: BIO 2040/2050 or BIO 3310/3320. Three hours. This course 
has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
 
EXS 4240 Biomechanics 
This course introduces concepts of mechanics in relation to human movement, specifically in exercise, 
sport and physical activity. The primary focus is to gain understanding of mechanical and anatomical 
principles that control the link between human motion and structural mechanics in coordination with 
functional mechanisms. Prerequisites: BIO 2040/2050 or BIO 3310/3320. Three hours.  
 
 


 
EXS 4840 Research in Exercise Science 
A course designed to give the student an opportunity to do individual research on a topic of interest in 
Exercise Science. Prerequisites: EXS 1000 and EXS 2150. Two hours. 
 
EXS 4930 Internship in Exercise Science 
The internship includes activity in a work environment, allowing the student to experience a hands-on 
opportunity to apply the skills and principles learned in class to a real-world, professional setting. Three 
hours of credit is given and is equivalent to approximately 120 hours in the work-place (or 40 work 
hours per credit hour). Prerequisites: EXS 1000 and EXS 2150. Three hours. 
 
MATHEMATICS 
MAT 1110 Mathematics for Elementary School Teachers  
This course investigates a variety of topics necessary for future elementary school teachers. Topics 
covered include numbers, measurement, probability, statistics, geometry, patterns, spatial relationships, 
and logic. This is not a methods class; it is a mathematics content class. Prerequisites: 12 credit hours; 
Basic Algebra and SED 1000. Three hours. 
MAT 1120 College Algebra 
Topics include algebraic operations, manipulation of functions, polynomial equation solutions, 
inequalities, logarithms, and exponentials. There will be practice with solving systems of equations, 
graphing, and algebra applications. Three hours. 
 
MAT 1185 Quantitative Reasoning 
This course is designed to build math literacy, which is necessary for informed citizenship, reasoning 
from evidence, and extracting information from data. Topics include proportional reasoning, math 
modeling, probability, statistics, and math in politics. The course requires complicated reasoning using 
elementary mathematics. Three hours.  
MAT 1230 Calculus I 
This course is a traditional introductory calculus course. We will study functions, limits, derivatives, and 
integrals. Applications of the derivative and the fundamental theorem of calculus will be particular 
highlights of this class as well as integrals and derivatives of logarithms and exponential functions. 
Students must enroll concurrently in MAT 1240. Four hours.  
MAT 1240 Calculus I Lab 
The laboratory is designed to support MAT 1230 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This 
course has a fee for consumables used in its labs. 
MAT 1250 Calculus II 
This course is a continuation of the topics covered in Calculus 1. We will study integration techniques, as 
well as integrals and derivatives of a variety of functions: logarithms, exponential functions, inverse 
trigonometric functions, and hyperbolic trigonometric functions. We will also study applications of 
integration, improper Riemann integrals, and L’Hopital’s rule for taking limits. Investigating infinite 
sequences and infinite series will be a highlight of this course. Prerequisites: MAT 1230 or permission of 
the mathematics program director. Three hours. 


 
MAT 2100 Introduction to Proofs 
This course is an introductory course on proofs and emphasizes logic, set theory and proof techniques. 
Theorems will be taken from topics including set theory, number theory and real analysis. Three hours. 
MAT 2220 Discrete Mathematics 
This course is an introduction to discrete mathematics, including combinatorics and graph theory. Topics 
covered include graph coloring, trees and searching, network flows, network algorithms and complexity 
analysis, recurrence relations, functions and relations, generating functions, set theory, and probability. 
An emphasis will be on proof by induction. Prerequisite: MAT 2100. Three hours. 
MAT 2250 Calculus III 
This course is an investigation of limits, derivatives, and integrals of functions of more than one variable. 
We will study various applications of calculus, further topics of multivariable calculus, and ways in which 
calculus interplays with the other mathematical disciplines such as linear algebra, probability theory, 
and complex analysis. Prerequisites: MAT 1250 or permission of the mathematics program director. 
Three hours.  
MAT 2280 Differential Equations 
A study of differential equations using analytical, numerical and graphical techniques. Emphasis is placed 
on solving first and second order, and systems of differential equations. Various types of differential 
equations, their solutions and their applications in physical sciences will be studied. Prerequisite: MAT 
2250. Three credit hours. 
 
MAT 3130 Linear Algebra 
This course builds on the geometric interpretation of vectors and linear equations from Calculus 3 to 
consider a more abstract view of linear algebra using vector spaces and linear transformations. The 
history of linear algebra is interspersed throughout the course. Emphasis is placed on real life 
applications, and technology is used when necessary. Prerequisite: MAT 2250. Three hours. 
MAT 3200 Probability and Statistics  
This first course in statistics provides a rigorous introduction to applied statistics.  Topics include 
sampling principles, elementary probability, the normal distribution, hypothesis testing, confidence 
intervals, inference on numerical and categorical variables, chi-squared, ANOVA, and linear regression.  
Multiple linear regression and logistic regression will be covered if time permits. Three hours. 
MAT 3280 College Geometry 
This course is a thorough investigation of the axioms and theorems of Euclidean geometry. Throughout 
this course we will also cover several topics in non-Euclidean geometry, symbolic logic, and axiomatic 
systems in general. This course is designed to thoroughly equip a future high school teacher with the 
content knowledge needed to successfully teach geometry. Prerequisite: MAT 2100 or permission of the 
mathematics program director. Three hours. 
MAT 3930 Independent Study in Mathematics 
An independent study in mathematics is designed for students who have excelled in several post-
calculus classes and desire to study a topic that is not currently available in the curriculum. A student 
wishing to take an independent study will establish a topic to study and seek out a faculty member to 
whom he or she will be responsible. Once a topic and a faculty member are determined, permission for 
the independent study must be obtained from the mathematics program director. Independent study in 


 
mathematics is a non-repeatable class. Prerequisites: MAT 2250, availability of professor, and 
permission of the mathematics program director. Three hours.  
MAT 4020 Senior Seminar in Mathematics 
This is a capstone course for mathematics and mathematics education majors. This course will cover 
several topics that draw together the various mathematical disciplines, and will portray the global 
perspective of mainstream mathematics. This course may meet in conjunction with other capstone 
courses within the science division for a portion of the semester. Prerequisites: declared mathematics or 
mathematics education major; and MAT 2250. Three hours. 
MAT 4140 Abstract Algebra 
Standard algebra is a study of the arithmetic structure of numbers, and of functions of numbers. There 
are other objects that we study in mathematics besides numbers, and consequently other arithmetic 
structures; for example, matrices, functions, and permutations. Abstract algebra is the study of general 
arithmetic structures, and of functions of these general structures. In this course we study the axioms of 
group theory and develop the body of theorems associated with these axioms. If time permits, we will 
also investigate the axioms and theorems of ring theory and field theory. Prerequisite: MAT 2100 or 
permission of the mathematics program director. Three hours. 
MAT 4200 Probability Theory 
In this course we study the axioms and theorems of probability theory. We study probability 
distributions of discrete and continuous random variables, and many of their applications. Throughout 
this course we will use a significant amount of calculus to develop the theory of probability. 
Prerequisites: MAT 2250 and MAT 2100, or permission of the mathematics program director. Three 
hours. 
MAT 4320 Mathematical Statistics 
This course is the study of multivariable statistics on real data sets. Correlation, hypothesis testing and 
ANOVA are highlights of this class, which require a significant use of calculus. Prerequisites: MAT 2250 
and MAT 3200. 
MAT 4280 Real Analysis 
Introduction to the fundamental concepts of real analysis. A study of the real number system, limits, 
sequences, series, convergence, functions, continuity, differentiability, and Riemann integration can all 
be touched on. Prerequisite: MAT 2100 or permission of the mathematics program director. Three 
hours. 
MAT 4830 Research in Mathematics  
Research in mathematics is designed for students who have excelled in several post-calculus classes and 
have a desire to investigate the fine details of a topic in an attempt to advance the theory with new 
theorems, new proofs, or new applications. A student wishing to undertake such a research project 
must do so under the strict supervision of a faculty member and with the permission of the mathematics 
program director. The supervising faculty member must be willing to invest significant time into helping 
the student find appropriate resources, ask appropriate research questions, and seek out coherent 
answers to the questions asked. This course is intended to give students precursory experience into 
what a graduate thesis experience would be like. Research in mathematics is a non-repeatable class. 
Prerequisites: MAT 2200, availability of professor, and permission of mathematics program director. 
Three hours. 


 
 
PHYSICS 
PHY 2140 College Physics I  
The first half of a basic course covering the topics of kinematics, dynamics, energy, waves and 
sound. Prerequisite - One of the following: MAT 1120, MAT 1230/40, ACT Math score of at least 26, SAT 
Math score of at least 610, passing of department placement exam, or permission of the instructor. 
Students must enroll concurrently in PHY 2150. Four hours. 
PHY 2150 College Physics I Lab  
Designed to support PHY 2140 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
PHY 2160 College Physics II 
The second half of a basic course covering the topics of thermodynamics, properties of matter, 
electricity, magnetism, light optics, atomic and nuclear physics. Emphasis is on an understanding of the 
physical principles operative in biological systems and on the application of physical methods in biology 
and medicine. Prerequisite: PHY 2140/2150. Students must enroll concurrently with PHY 2170. Four 
hours. 
 
PHY 2170 College Physics II Lab  
Designed to support PHY 2160 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
PHY 2240 University Physics I 
This is the first half of a two-semester course in calculus-based physics suggested for students in the 
physical sciences and mathematics. Definitions, concepts, and problem solving will be emphasized. 
Topics include kinematics, dynamics, energy, conservation laws, rotation, harmonic motion, mechanical 
waves and thermodynamics. Prerequisite: MAT 1230/1240. Students must enroll concurrently in PHY 
2250. Four hours. 
PHY 2250 University Physics I Lab 
Designed to support PHY 2240 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
PHY 2260 University Physics II 
This is the second half of a two-semester course in calculus-based physics suggested for students in the 
physical sciences and mathematics. Definitions, concepts, and problem solving will be emphasized. 
Topics include electricity and magnetism, (electric and magnetic fields, forces, energy, potential, 
charged particle motion, induction, and circuits), sound waves and optics. Prerequisite: PHY 2240/2250. 
Students must enroll concurrently in PHY 2270. Four hours. 
PHY 2270 University Physics II Lab 
Designed to support PHY 2260 and must be taken concurrently with the course. This course has a fee for 
consumables used in its labs. 
 
PHY 4810–4830 Research in Physics 
Designed for research on a topic of interest. One to three hours. 
 


 
GENERAL SCIENCE  
SCI 1140 Physical Science Survey 
Activities and lectures will cover motion, energy, gravity, light, radiation, earth materials, and space. 
Three hours. 
 
SCI 1160 Theories on Origins 
A survey of origin theories with emphasis on creation/evolution. Explores fossils, design, 
thermodynamics, chronology, flood geology, life in space, and current creation research. Three hours. 
 
SCI 2030 Faith, Science, and Reason 
Faith, Science, and Reason is designed to assist the student in demonstrating the scope and magnitude 
of science and mathematics: why we study these subjects; knowing the limitations of these subjects; 
where the Christian fits and operates within the scientific paradigm; how a Christian can incorporate 
their faith and reason within the scientific enterprise; and how to use it as a productive platform when 
communicating to those of different worldviews. Three hours.  
 
SCI 3910–3930 Independent Study in Physical Science 
Topics or projects to be chosen and investigated in the areas of physical science in consultation with the 
individual instructor. Prerequisite: permission of the physical science program director. One to three 
hours; non-repeatable. 
 
 

 
BHS 2200 Introduction to American Government    
This introduces students to how the political system in America functions. It focuses on the actual 
workings of the American government and starts with the cultural and constitutional contexts of 
American politics. (Home department–POS. Register as POS 2200.) Three hours. 
 
BHS 2400 Research Methods in the Social Sciences 
An introductory study of the principles and techniques of investigation and data collection in the social 
sciences. The course will deal with techniques of organizing, conducting, analyzing, and presenting such 
data. Three hours. 
 
BHS 3140 Cross-Cultural Youth Ministries 
The student will learn how to assess relevant issues related to specific cultures and how to target the 
needs of youth within various socio-economic groups. This class will develop strategies for meeting the 
needs of youth in a cross-cultural context and how to church plant using youth as a target group. The 
students will be taught how to train youth leadership to accomplish church planting and development. 
The class will be held in a cross-cultural setting offering hands-on training. (Home department–YMI. 
Register as YMI 3140.) Prerequisite: YMI 2140. Three hours. 
 
BHS 3200 Probability and Statistics 
Theory of probability, statistical techniques and tools, and applications in business, education, 
psychology, mathematics, and sociology. (Home department–MAT. Register as MAT 3200). Three hours. 
 
BHS 3270 Social Psychology 
A study of the social behavior of the individual and the group. Particular attention is given to the 
development and dynamics of social groups, social perception, motivation, attitudes and values. Three 
hours. 
 
BHS 3810–3830 Readings in Behavioral Science 
This course is designed to allow the students a more in-depth investigation of a topic of special interest 
in the areas of psychology or sociology. Prerequisite: permission of the individual instructor. One to 
three hours, non-repeatable. 
 
BHS 3910–3930 Independent Study in Behavioral Science  
Topics or projects to be chosen and investigated in the areas of psychology or sociology in consultation 
with the individual instructor. Prerequisite: permission of the department chair. One to three hours, 
non-repeatable. 
 
BHS 4000 Brain and Behavior  
This course is an introduction to the science of brain-behavior relationships. Topics will include the 
structure and functions of the nervous system, including mechanisms of sensory processing and motor 
control, sleep, sexual behavior, emotion, mental disorders, language, and learning and memory. In 
addition, the course covers psychotropic medications, disorders, and symptomatology associated with 
various neurochemical disorders, psychological disorders, and addictions. Three hours. 
 
BHS 4050 Addictive Treatment 
This course is designed to give the student a theoretical and practical understanding of addictive disorders. 
The topics covered in this class will include sexual, gambling and other addictive disorders. In addition, this 

 
course will examine the addictive process and relevant treatment issues in working with a variety of addictive 
disorders. Three hours. 
 
BHS 4510-4530 Behavioral Science Research Practicum 
A course designed to give the student an opportunity to do individual research on special 
problems in psychology. Prerequisite: BHS 2400 Research Methods. One to three hours. 
 
BHS 4730 Practicum in Behavioral Science 
A course designed to give behavioral science majors practical experience in a choice of various agencies 
offering psychological services. Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.  Three hours.  
 
BHS 4740  Advanced Practicum in Behavioral Science 
A course designed to give behavioral science majors advanced, practical experience in a choice of 
various agencies. Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.  Three hours.  
 
BHS 4810–4830 Research in Behavioral Science 
A course designed to give the student an opportunity to do individual research on special problems in 
psychology. Prerequisite: permission of the department chair. One to three hours, non-repeatable. 
 
BHS 4930 & 4660 Internship in Behavioral Science 
This internship course in behavioral science is to provide the interns with a structured introduction to 
various aspects of professional work. Students are given the opportunity to observe and develop their 
own skills in a first-hand operational structure within a behavioral science agency. Students in the 
internship course will get direct supervision from an onsite supervisor in their specific field of interest. 
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.  BHS 4930 – three hours. BHS 4660 – six hours.  
 
PSYCHOLOGY  
PSY 1100 Introduction to Psychology 
An introduction to psychology as the study of human behavior. Basic principles of psychology will be 
explored including the process of learning, memory, perception, sensation, motivation, and emotion. 
Personal and social aspects of human development will be emphasized. Three hours. 
 
PSY 2100 Introduction to Counseling 
An introduction to the major theories in counseling including secular and Christian approaches. The 
methodology of each approach will be analyzed based upon the respective theory of psychopathology. 
Special attention will be given to various skills, techniques, and applications of these approaches. Three 
hours. 
 
PSY 2170 Abnormal Psychology 
A study of mental and emotional disorders, their symptomatology, classification, and methods of 
treatment. Special attention is given to a Christian approach to mental health. Three hours. 
 
PSY 2330 Family Systems 
This course will examine the family from a systems approach for the purpose of understanding 
how the family operates and how dysfunction occurs. Knowledge gained from this course will 
be useful in understanding and analyzing what often occurs in other systems (workplaces, 
churches, schools, etc.). Family counseling will also be an aspect of this class. Three hours. 

 
 
PSY 2360 Child and Adolescent Psychology 
A psychological study covering the life span from early childhood to the adult stage. This course stresses 
practical applications for working in family, educational, and counseling settings. Three hours. 
 
PSY 2420 Organizational Psychology 
This course is specifically designed for students interested in Psychology and the Professional 
Communication major offered through the communication department. This course will focus 
on the application of social psychology to organizational settings. Topics covered will include 
motivation of workers; group decision-making; leadership styles; career management, and 
organizational development. Class format will consist of experiential exercises combined with 
lecture, discussion, and team activities. Three hours. 
 
PSY 2600 Multicultural Psychology 
This course studies the relationship between identity development and primary culture(s). A variety of 
ethnic, social, religious, and cultural group norms are considered along with an examination of the 
extent of influence these may have on the individual. The environmental factors that impact people 
such as global markets, Internet collaborations, and multicultural neighborhoods are examined. Three 
hours. 
 
PSY 2700 Psychology of Religion 
An overview of the research into the psychology of religion as it related to biological, social, moral, and 
personal behavior. Provides a theoretical framework for assessing religion, for exploring the 
development and role of personal faith through the lifespan, and for understanding the various aspects 
of religion such as conversion, transformation, mysticism, health, and psychotheology. 
 
PSY 2880 Life Span Development 
A study of the basic principles and theories of human development with special emphasis given to the 
determinants of the human life span from the beginning of life through infancy, childhood, adolescence and 
adulthood to death and dying. Emphasis is placed on the transitional life processes as they occur at each 
stage, and attention is given to physical, intellectual, social and personality development in each stage of the 
life span. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3100 Learning and Behavior 
This course will examine historical and current theories that explain how different types of learning provide 
the foundation for most behavior. Designed to apply learning theory and principles to the presentation of 
learning, it illustrates how learning principles operate in both animals and people. Reflecting the latest 
research, the study of learning theories helps solve practical relationship problems and explain everyday 
behaviors. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3200 Grief and Loss 
This course will focus on the human experience of grief and loss that occur across the lifespan. 
Current theories and research will be examined, as well as the evidence-based practices of grief 
therapy. Three hours 
 
 
 

 
PSY 3260 Biblical Psychology 
This course will examine the relationship between the fields of psychology and theology. A theory of 
integration will be presented, along with discussions concerning specific “psychological” topics (i.e. self-
esteem, etc.) from a biblical vantage point. Three hours. 
 
PSY3270 Psychology of Women 
This course will cover a wide range of topics pertaining to women from a Biblical worldview.  The goal of 
this course is to look at common problems experienced by women over the course of their lifespan from 
a theoretical, sociological and biological perspective.  In this course students will critically evaluate 
gender differences and similarities in personality and behavior. Three hours.   
 
PSY 3300 Sports Psychology 
This course is designed to help students both learn and then apply practical as well as theoretical information 
as it relates to the psychology of sport. The class will work to provide an understanding of how personality, 
self-concept, self-esteem, self-efficacy and other psychological characteristics relate to participation and 
performance in sport and physical activities. The class will also investigate the impact of stress, motivation, 
goal-setting, leadership and imagery on performance. The student will also learn common struggles and 
intervention strategies in working with athletes and recreational exercisers to enhance performance and 
participation. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3380 Theories of Personality 
An introduction to the major theories of personality and how it develops, including psychoanalysis, 
humanistic, existential, and behavioristic approaches. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3440 Process and Techniques of Counseling 
This course develops a theoretical base for evaluating human problems within a biblical framework. 
Once this has been accomplished, practical techniques will be discussed to help counselors structure the 
counseling session and implement change. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3550 Health Psychology 
Students will develop an appreciation of the interaction and relationship between biological, 
psychological and social factors that influence one’s physical health and health behaviors. This course 
will examine lifestyle factors such as diet, exercise, stress, substance abuse and individual motivational 
factors. Additionally, this course will assess how psychological research, theories and principles apply to 
health promotion, health care issues and chronic illness. Three hours. 
 
PSY 3600 Motivation and Emotion 
This course is a study of the process of motivation and emotion and how they impact behavior and choices 
that people make every day.  This course will study the research on the psychological and physiological 
aspects of motivation and emotion and the impact that those aspects have on behavior. The course will 
provide the student with a framework to view motivation and emotion that can help process difficult 
questions about human behavior such as “why are some people more emotional than others?”, and “is it 
possible to create environments that increase the motivation of another human?”. Three hours. 
 
PSY 4000 Group Techniques of Counseling 
This course will examine the history, theories and methods of group counseling. Students will learn 
about the applications of group psychotherapy through group discussions and role-playing 

 
demonstrations. This course will further examine the roles, behaviors, and therapeutic factors utilized in 
a variety of group settings. Three hours. 
 
PSY 4040 Psychology of Aging 
What is it like to grow “old”? How can you better understand those aging around you? What can you do 
to make the most of your own “golden years”? The purpose of this course is not only to discuss facts and 
findings about the various aspects of the aging process (psychological, physical, cognitive, social, etc.), 
but also to explore how these processes are a factor of the dynamic interaction of individual factors 
(personality, lifestyle) and environmental factors (family, neighborhood, culture) across time. In this 
way, this course takes a developmental approach to the study of the psychology of aging. An emphasis 
on active learning, reflection, and application bring course concepts into “real life.” Three hours 
 
PSY 4170 Psychological Measurement 
The measurement of human behavior with psychological instruments. An introduction to tests of 
intelligence, achievement, personality, and interest, emphasizing test construction, administration, and 
validation. Three hours. 
 
PSY 4260 Therapeutic Play 
This course provides an overview of principles of therapeutic play and play therapy including 
history, theories, techniques, applications, and skills. The content focuses on basic therapeutic skill 
development within the context of ethical and cultural diversity sensitive practice. Attention is 
given to understanding the role of therapeutic play and play therapy in the context of the 
participant’s clinical responsibilities in multiple settings including: schools, counseling clinics, and/or 
medical facilities. Participants learn strategies for engaging children in art, music, and other 
alternative therapeutic strategies to assist children and teens in improving their coping skills and 
ability to respond to stress in a healthy manner. Three hours 
 
PSY 4280 Child Life: A Scope of Practice 
This course fulfills all of the Associate of Child Life Professionals (ACLP) requirements for the Child 
Life course. A course exploring the hospitalized child and family. Psychosocial and developmental 
needs of infants, children, adolescents and families in health care context, with a focus on the role 
and interventions of the child life specialist. Applies theories of child development and family 
systems to effective child life practice in hospitals. Three hours. 
 
PSY 4300 Clinical Practice/Senior Seminar 
This course is designed to be the capstone for a psychology/counseling student at Grace College.  As a 
capstone course, it will serve to provide a broader context about both the science and field of psychology.  
This course will also focus on what it means to be a psychologist, the current issues and conflicts of 
psychology, and future directions in the field.  This seminar course will address the importance of evidence-
based practice and practical applications to the field of psychology.  Three hours. 
 
 
 

 
SOCIOLOGY  
SOC 1100 Introduction to Sociology 
An introductory study of humans functioning in society. Basic principles of sociology will be experienced 
including organization, structure, strata, and problems in American society. Emphasis will be placed on 
observational techniques that will help to develop a spirit of active participation in the world. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2100 Marriage and Family 
A study of the family as a basic social institution with its cultural variations. Emphasis is upon premarital and 
marital factors that contribute to a successful marriage or family disorganization. Christian ideals for 
wholesome courtship and family living are stressed. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2140 Social Problems and Pathology 
This course provides an analysis of a section of major social problems related to social inequalities, problems 
of social institutions, and behavioral deviance, and global social problems we face today and the pathology of 
group relations. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2340 Introduction to Criminal Justice 
This course introduces students to the essentials of criminal justice and the most significant issues in 
today’s American criminal justice system. Students will learn the true roles of the police, courts, and 
corrections and develop an understanding of the complex ways in which they work together. 
Information on criminal justice careers will help students learn about the meaning of criminal justice to 
those who work in the field and will provide useful information that can aid career choices. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2400 American Corrections 
This course is an introductory study of Corrections as it relates to the Criminal Justice field. The students 
will discover topics such as sentencing, probation vs. parole, inmate culture, prison policy, inmate 
segregation, and community corrections. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2420 Criminal Investigation 
This course will present the procedures, techniques, and applications of criminal investigations. In 
addition, this course will discuss modern investigation tools, as well as established investigation policies. 
Three hours. 
 
SOC 2440 Criminal Procedures 
 This course examines the laws, procedures, and traditions of the criminal justice system. Students will 
explore current events in the media and issues in today’s American criminal justice system with an 
emphasis on procedural law. This course is designed to provide students with a collective overview of 
constitutional rights and the related responsibility of police. Students will explore roles of the law 
enforcement, courts, and corrections and develop an understanding of the complex ways in which they 
work together. Special emphasis will be placed on amendments to the Constitution as related to the 
rights of the individual. Three hours 
 
SOC 2600 Forensic Interviewing 
Instruction and skill development in interviewing, note-taking, and report writing in the criminal justice 
field. This course will prepare students to conduct interviews of witnesses, victims, and suspects. It will 
demonstrate how to organize information into effective written reports. Special consideration will be 
given in the area of child and adolescent interviews. Upon successful completion of the course students 

 
will be able to conduct interviews, collect information admissible in court, demonstrate appropriate 
note-taking skills and create reports that convey the pertinent information. Three hours. 
 
SOC 2700 History and Contemporary Issues in Criminal Justice 
In this course, students will look at the evolution of the criminal justice system from the 
criminal acts to those who commit them. This class will explore societal responses to crime 
from a historical and contemporary framework. Among the topics are problem-oriented 
policing, terrorism, justice during the Civil War, incarceration trends, and today’s current crime 
challenges. This class will explore the evolution of crime through patterns of crime and 
punishment during selected periods of time. Students will utilize scientific rigor and understand 
how to assess and manage opportunities and challenges within the criminal justice system by 
observing them through a historical assessment. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3010 State and Local Government    
This is an examination of the structure and interplay between state, county, and local governments.  
Issues such as social security, zoning, welfare, public health, and the environment will be examined from 
the point of view of how they originate at the local levels yet how they exist and grow within federal 
guidelines.  (Home department POS – Register as POS 3010)   For Criminal Justice and Sociology majors 
only.  Three hours. 
 
SOC 3130 Business Law I  
Basic legal principles which control modern business transactions. Deals with such topics as contracts, 
agencies, employment, negotiable instruments, property, and sales and business relations with the 
government. (Home department–BUS. Register as BUS 3130.) Three hours.  
 
SOC 3220 Principles and Practices of Prayer   
Students will examine the teaching of the Scriptures on the subject of prayer with a view to discovering 
the absolute necessity of a vital prayer experience in the life of the man or woman of God and in the life 
of the Church. Urgency, consistency, and effectiveness of prayer will all be discussed as well as practical 
guidance for fostering these. Significant time will be spent in the practice of prayer.  (Home department 
– MIS.  Register as MIS 3220) Three hours. 
 
SOC 3230 Substance Use and Abuse 
This course is designed to give the student a theoretical and practical understanding of addictive disorders. At 
the completion of this course the student will be able to define several key concepts relative to addictions 
and the disease of chemical dependency, have a workable knowledge of the concepts of withdrawal 
tolerance and drug interactions as they relate to commonly abused drugs, and have gained a general 
knowledge of concepts, methods, and techniques in the area of addictive disorders, substance abuse, and/or 
chemical dependency. Three hours.  
 
SOC 3360 Juvenile Delinquency 
This course will provide an extensive overview of the principles and concepts surrounding Juvenile 
Delinquency. This course will examine the nature and extent of Juvenile Delinquency, Theories of 
Delinquency, causes of delinquency, and how to control and prevent delinquency. Three hours. 
 
 
 

 
SOC 3370 Criminology 
This course is designed to engage the student in an in-depth analysis of crime, the criminal career, and the 
criminal justice system as a complex but interrelated whole. Criminology will seek to examine the legal 
definitions of criminal behavior, current theoretical explanations, trends in reported distribution of crime, 
and governmental agencies commissioned to deal with the problem of crime such as police, courts, and 
correctional institutions. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3460 Police and American Society 
The role of law enforcement in society as it relates to local, state, and federal jurisdictions. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3470 Homeland Security 
This course will provide a broad overview of the basic operations, functions, and issues related 
to securing our homeland from domestic and international threats. In addition, this course will 
evaluate areas of possible threat including terrorism and possible proactive and reactive 
measures against such threats. An examination of the emergency management system and the 
role of public health and the private sector in homeland security will also be addressed. Three 
hours. 
 
SOC 3560 Victimology 
This course will provide an extensive overview of the principles and concepts of traditional and modern 
victimologists. This course will further examine victimology, analysis of victimization patterns and 
trends, and theoretical reasoning and responses to criminal victimization. In addition, this course 
explores the role of victimology in the criminal justice system, examining the consequences of 
victimization and the various remedies now available for victims. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3590 Emergency Incident Management 
This course will examine the emergency preparedness practices used by first responders and the private 
sector doing a critical incident. Topics will include an overview of incident command and the National 
Incident Management System (NIMS), National Response Plan (NRP), as well as interdependence 
between the public and private sectors in community emergency preparedness. In addition, the course 
will address critical infrastructure protection, joint risk, assessments and response, and recovery 
activities in critical incident scenarios. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3600 Urban Sociology 
An examination of the urbanization process, the dynamics of the urban “explosion” and its implications 
world-wide. Particular attention is given to subcultural groupings and to the social and subcultural 
interactions that characterize the urban experience. The inherent problems of urban growth and the 
enactment of urban policies designed to address those problems are also considered. Students are given 
first-hand exposure to the urban environment. Three hours. 
 
SOC 3700 Criminal Profiling and Theory 
This course is specifically designed for students interested in law enforcement and corrections. 
Students will center their exploration of criminal behavior on its motivation, the environmental 
influences, and patterns of offending. Among the topics are ethics and criminal profiles, serial 
criminals, stalking, psychopathic behaviors, fire and explosives, criminal offender 
characteristics, criminal motivation, and case assessment. Students will explore criminal 
profiling as an investigative tool used by professionals to assist agencies in pursuing unknown 

 
perpetrators. This class will provide an understanding of the history of profiling including 
theories and investigative techniques regarding profiling criminal offenders through a blend of 
social science and legal research. Students will gain a foundational knowledge of the integral 
relationship between profiling techniques and theories of criminal behavior. Three hours. 
 
SOC 4100 Criminal Law 
The study of substantive criminal law as a means of defining social values. Attention is given to the 
definition and classification of crime, as well as criminal law theory and the relationship of criminal law 
to the criminal justice system. Three hours. 
 
SOC 4150 Gender, Race, and Violence 
An examination of race in the context of the criminal justice system. Emphasis on the treatment 
of racial minorities as victims and offenders by law enforcement, courts, and corrections. 
Students will learn how to understand how race and ethnicity are central to crime and criminal 
justice. Gain knowledge about the difference between race and ethnicity. Explore the different 
theoretical explanations for the racial and ethnic gap in offending and victimization. Research 
the nature and extent of inequality in American society with respect to racial and ethnic 
minorities. Look into how race and ethnicity continue to be taken into consideration during the 
jury selection process. Additionally, students will explore different parts of the criminal justice 
system and develop an accurate picture of who is in prison and the racial and ethnic 
composition of the prison population. Three hours. 
 
SOC 4220 Senior Seminar in Criminal Justice 
This is an examination of the major theoretical explanations of crime and criminal behavior with a focus 
on examining current events. Students will explore current events in the media and issues in today’s 
American criminal justice system. This course is designed to provide students with a collective overview 
of historical and current criminological perspectives. Students will explore roles of the law enforcement, 
courts, and corrections and develop an understanding of the complex ways in which they work together. 
Students will explore criminal justice careers and hear from those who currently work in the criminal 
justice field. Three hours. 
 
SOC 4810 Special Topics in Victimology 
This course is an in-depth examination of the role of the victim in criminal incidents and criminal justice 
case processing. Students analyze concerns related to the area of family violence including women’s 
experiences as victims, gender based abuse, intimate partner violence, rape, human trafficking, and 
stalking. This course examines child abuse, as well as child neglect and maltreatment. Special emphasis 
will be placed on FBI typologies, prevalence, recidivism, and characteristics. Students will explore the 
physical, mental, and legal consequences, institutional responses, and prevention efforts. Three hours. 

CPY 5002-I Residency Two 
Residency consists of counselor preparation and training, evaluation in skill development, and spiritual 
growth activities. The second residency centers around assessing interpersonal competencies, skill 
development and evaluation, and advanced topics. Each day of residency, students will participate in a 
spiritual formation activity that encourages a closer walk with the Lord and fosters understanding of a 
Christian counselor identity. Students are required to attend Residency each year that they are enrolled 
and actively taking classes within the CMHC program. (Zero hours) 
 
CPY 5003-I Residency Three 
Residency consists of counselor preparation and training, evaluation in skill development, and spiritual 
growth activities. The third residency consists of training in professional identity topics, preparing for 
licensure and employment, potential research endeavors, and taking the CPCE exam. Each day of 
residency, students will participate in a spiritual formation activity that encourages a closer walk with 
the Lord and fosters understanding of a Christian counselor identity. Students are required to attend 
Residency each year that they are enrolled and actively taking classes within the CMHC program. (Zero 
hours) 
 

 
CPY 5005 Orientation to CMHC 
Students are introduced to Clinical Mental Health Counseling by learning about the key components of 
the CMHC program. Topics discussed include the historical roots and three distinctives of the program, 
the emphasis on skill development, professional counselor identity, CACREP accreditation, gatekeeping 
elements, the graduate culture, advising, clinical field requirements, APA writing style, and technology 
requirements.  (Zero hours). 
CPY 5050-I Theological Foundations of Counseling  
This course will examine a theological foundation of counseling specifically as it pertains to Scriptural 
truths and principles. A biblical theory of personality will be presented which will lead to biblical 
concepts of counseling.  (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 5100-I Foundations of CMHC 
This course is intended to offer an introduction to the profession of mental health counseling. Students 
will be exposed to the historical, philosophical, societal, economic, and political dimensions of mental 
health counseling. The focus will be on fostering student knowledge and professional identity by 
increasing awareness of various roles and duties of professional mental health counselors as well as 
learning how they interact with professionals from other disciplines within the mental health field. 
(Three hours) 
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 5150-I Marriage & Family Counseling  
Through the lens of Scripture, this course will examine a broad theoretical and practical foundation for 
counseling couples and families. Students will explore how the counselor can implement knowledge and 
skills necessary to aid in the mending of marriages and the restoration of proper family functioning. 
(Three hours)  
Prerequisites: CPY5200; Prerequisite or Concurrent: CPY5350 
 
CPY 5200-I Personality & Counseling Theories  
This course examines the origins, development, and current status of major personality/counseling 
theories that provide a framework for clinical application and inform current counseling practice. The 
emphasis will be on the structure and dynamics of personality and implications for understanding 
behavior and change. Students will evaluate the compatibility of these theories in light of their Christian 
worldview, ultimately selecting a particular theoretical orientation to be used in counseling practice. 
(Three hours) 
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 5250-I Psychopathology  
This course focuses on concepts of psychopathology as well as the major diagnostic categories of the 
current DSM, etiological factors, and differential diagnoses. Students are introduced to 
psychopharmacology as well as current therapeutic approaches, with an emphasis on ethical 
assessment and treatment planning. Students will examine issues of psychopathology and normalcy 
through the lens of Scripture while considering cultural, biological, social, psychological, and spiritual 
factors. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites or Concurrent: CPY5100  
 

 
CPY 5350-I Counseling Skills  
Professional skill development is the focus of this course. Students will learn to identify client issues that 
impact wellness, and gain proficiency in basic counseling skills through instruction, modeling, and 
practice. Students will develop awareness of strengths and weaknesses in relating to others, and explore 
how interpersonal factors influence therapy. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites or Concurrent: CPY5100 
 
CPY 5380-I Psychotherapy with Children & Adolescents  
The course will explore diagnoses specific to children and adolescents with an emphasis on theories, 
processes, evidence-based practices, techniques, and incorporating families in working with this 
population. A central theme in the course includes developing an understanding and readiness to 
address the needs of children, adolescents, and their families using biblical and counseling perspectives. 
(Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5200, CPY5250 
 
CPY 5592-I Research & Program Evaluation 
As it pertains to the study of counseling, this course is designed to familiarize students with common 
research designs, basic statistical concepts and analyses, and critical evaluation of published research. 
Students will learn how to utilize this knowledge as it relates to program evaluation. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: none 
 
CPY 5610-I Candidacy 
Candidacy is the first of three DOGC gatekeeping processes which assess student readiness to advance 
through the CMHC program. Students register for Candidacy in Spring following successful completion of 
Practicum or concurrently with Practicum in the spring semester. Registration for Candidacy requires 
prior approval from the student’s advisor. (Zero hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY 5050, CPY 5100, CPY 5350, CPY 6350, CPY 5250, CPY 5200, CPY 5700 and advisor 
approval 
 
CPY 5650-I Addictions Counseling  
This course examines the models, etiologies, psychopathologies, assessments, and recovery strategies 
related to addiction counseling.  Students engage in applied learning activities to enhance 
understanding of addictive behavior and its treatment.  Evidence-based interventions and the stages of 
change model are emphasized. Students explore the dynamics and treatment of addiction from an 
ethical, multicultural, sociological, and biblical framework.  (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5200, CPY5250, CPY6350 
 
CPY 5691-I Assessment and Testing 
In this course, the measurement of human behavior with assessment instruments will be examined and 
students will build a working knowledge of ethical evaluation, administration, and interpretation of tests 
used in treatment planning for counseling. Content will include an introduction to the basic statistical 
concepts in testing and the historical, ethical, multicultural, social, and clinical use of standardized and 
non-standardized tests for individuals and groups. Students will learn methods for determining the 
appropriate assessment for a particular population, and practice administering formal and informal 
psychological assessments. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5200, CPY5250, CPY5350 
 

 
CPY 5700-I Practicum   
This course is the first of three fieldwork courses and emphasizes application of foundational counseling 
skills, diagnosis, and theory-based case conceptualization and treatment planning during a minimum 
of 100 hours of supervised, counseling interactions with clients. Students are introduced to advanced 
counseling techniques and continue to develop competency in foundational counseling skills at clinical 
sites through a combination of observation, co-counseling, and leading counseling sessions or groups 
under direct supervision. Students use audio/video recordings during weekly, live supervision with 
clinical and faculty supervisors throughout the course.  (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY 5100, CPY5200, CPY5250, CPY5350; Prerequisite or Concurrent: CPY6350 
 
CPY 5750-I Gender & Sexuality  
This course considers biological, physiological, psychological, cultural, societal, and biblical 
considerations of gender and human sexuality including populations under-reported in research. 
Emphasis is placed on the development of understanding and appreciation for the role of gender and 
sexuality throughout the various phases of the life cycle, and on preparing to work with clients who 
bring concerns related to gender or sexuality. (Three hours)  
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 6000-I Advanced Clinical Practices and Treatment 
This course will examine the practice of counseling as it pertains to treatment and interventions. 
Evidenced based counseling strategies for the treatment of a variety of mental health issues will be 
reviewed. Attention will be paid to crisis, trauma, grief, anxiety and depression. Students will use their 
knowledge of etiology, nomenclature and diagnosis to solidify their application of interventions and 
treatments. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5250, CPY 5350, CPY 5100, CPY5200, CPY5700, CPY5691 Concurrent: CPY6700 
 
CPY 6100-I Technology in Counseling 
This course will study the process, application, and implementation of technology in counseling. Focus of 
study will include unique legal and ethical responsibilities and best practices for distance delivery of 
counseling services. (Zero hours) 
Prerequisite: CPY 5700 
 
CPY 6200-I Ethical & Legal Issues 
Students will acquire a broad knowledge base of the legal and ethical issues relevant to clinical mental 
health counseling practice. Instruction in critical thinking and ethical decision-making is a major 
component of this course. Students will draw from scripture, codes of ethics, and state and federal law 
to develop a high degree of personal and professional ethics to enhance clinical work (Three hours)  
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 6350-I Group Counseling  
This course will examine the dynamics, theories, ethics, leadership styles, types and purposes, methods 
and skills, development, and therapeutic factors of group counseling as applied in a multicultural society 
and as viewed from a Christian perspective. Students will be trained in applications of group counseling 
through group discussions and applied learning activities for the purpose of developing proficiency in 
group leadership skills. This course includes an experiential component intended to increase the 
student’s understanding of the dynamics of group membership.  (Three hours)  
Prerequisites: CPY5250, CPY5350 Prerequisite or Concurrent: CPY 5200 
 

 
CPY 6400-I Human Growth & Development  
In this course, developmental models and theories will be examined and synthesized to understand the 
needs of individuals, families, and communities using neuro-biological, physiological, sociological, 
multicultural, cognitive, emotional, moral, and spiritual dimensions throughout the lifespan cycle. 
Students will examine the effects of resilience, and spirituality on human behavior and development 
related to disability, psychopathology, and during crises, disasters, or other situational factors. 
Students learn to link theory and theology to practice and demonstrate how a strong grasp of 
developmental principles can inform the practice and art of competent therapy. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5200 
CPY 6500-I Social & Cultural Issues  
Cultural issues such as ethnic heritage, socioeconomic status, age, disability, and religion will be 
considered as germane to the therapeutic relationship and client conceptualization. Emphasis will be 
placed on understanding worldviews, cultural history, values, systems and structures, and other such 
factors as they impact effective diagnosis, assessment, and interventions used with culturally diverse 
clients. Understanding culturally specific theories and advocacy will be introduced as part of a culturally 
competent clinician's developed skill set. Each of these concepts will be considered in light of a Biblical 
framework that foundationally understands God’s view of all people groups. This course includes an 
experiential component intended to increase the student’s multicultural awareness across diverse 
counseling settings. (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: none  
 
CPY 6600-I Lifestyle & Career Counseling  
This course will assist the student in defining a biblical view of work and its relevance in both secular and 
Christian contexts through the examination of scripture, theories, decision-making models, techniques, 
and resources related to career development and maintenance, and the resolution of career-related 
problems. Students will explore avocational, educational, occupational and labor market and career 
information resources with an emphasis on developing basic competencies in career and educational 
planning. The usefulness of assessment instruments and techniques relevant to career planning and 
decision-making will be demonstrated through experiential learning providing an understanding of 
specific populations, multicultural issues, and the intersection of mental health and career.  (Three 
hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5200, CPY5350 
 
CPY 6700-I Internship in CMHC  
This course is the second of three fieldwork courses where students continue to develop and refine 
clinical skills while meeting state hourly requirements for working directly with clients in a mental health 
counseling setting. Students attend weekly individual or triadic supervision with a licensed supervisor on 
site. Faculty provides weekly group supervision, offering feedback from both a clinical and biblical 
perspective.  (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5610, CPY5700, CPY6200, CPY5691 Prerequisite or Concurrent: CPY5150 
CPY 6710-I Advanced Internship in CMHC 
This course is the third of three fieldwork courses and a continuation of the internship experience. 
Students complete state requirements for counseling hours and attend weekly individual or triadic 
supervision with a licensed supervisor on site. Faculty provides weekly group supervision, offering 
feedback from both a clinical and biblical perspective.  (Three hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY6700  Prerequisites or Concurrent: All program courses not yet completed 

 
 
CPY 6720-I Advanced Internship Extension 
This course is an extension of Advanced Internship. Enrollment in this course requires prior approval by 
the Department Chair. Elective (One hour) 
Prerequisites: CPY6710  
 
CPY 6800-I Counselor Preparation Comprehensive Examination (CPCE) 
The Counselor Preparation Comprehensive Examination (CPCE) is the second of three gatekeeping 
processes that assess students for readiness to graduate from the CMHC program. The CPCE tests the 
student’s proficiency in the following eight core curriculum areas: Professional Counseling Orientation 
and Ethical Practice, Social and Cultural Diversity, Human Growth and Development; Career 
Development, Counseling and Helping Relationships; Social and Cultural Foundations; Group Counseling 
and Group Work; Assessment and Testing, and Research and Program Evaluation.  The CPCE is a 
“Pass/Fail” component of the CMHC degree.   (Zero hours) 
Prerequisites: CPY5100, CPY 5350, CPY 6350, CPY 5250, CPY 5690, CPY 6200, CPY 5200, CPY 5700, CPY 
5592, CPY6400, CPY 6500, CPY 6600, CPY 5610 
 
CPY 6900 Portfolio Review 
The Portfolio Review is the third of three gatekeeping processes that assess students for readiness to 
graduate from the CMHC program. The Portfolio Review is comprised of both written and oral 
components that include academic assignments and a presentation of a professional identity oral 
presentation to faculty. The Portfolio Review is a “Pass/Fail” component of the CMHC degree. (Zero 
hours) 
Prerequisite: CPY6700 Concurrent: CPY6710 
FACULTY and PROGRAM STAFF 
FULL TIME FACULTY 
Belton, Rebecca, MA, LPC (VA & WI) 
Instructor of Counseling 
Clinical Coordinator 




ACCOUNTING 
 
ACC 2110 Financial Accounting 
Develops an understanding and application of basic financial accounting principles. Emphasis on building 
and using basic financial statements and a manager’s use of accounting data. This course and ACC2120 
together serve as the first year of accounting. Three hours. 
 
ACC 2120 Managerial Accounting 
The study of the managerial aspects of accounting and finance. Includes an in-depth study of the 
statement of cash flows, analysis of financial statements, product cost management, and cash 
budgeting. Prerequisite: ACC2110. Three hours. 
 
ACC 3110 3120 Intermediate Accounting I and II 
Integrates accounting theories and concepts in the preparation of financial statements. During the two 
semesters, students encounter a detailed study of the balance sheet, income statement, and statement 
of cash flows. Prerequisite: ACC2110. Three hours each. 
 
ACC 3210 Cost Accounting 
Emphasis on job order cost, process cost, and standard cost systems as well as the use of cost data in 
decision making. Prerequisite: ACC2120. Three hours. 
 
ACC 3270 Financial Planning (cross listed with FIN 3270) 
To acquaint the student with the principles and concepts of basic financial planning and personal 
finance, with both theoretical and personal application.  Dave Ramsey’s College curriculum is used in 
this course.  Prerequisite: ACC2110.  Three hours. 
 
 ACC 3300 Introduction to Tax 
This course provides an introduction to tax concepts and the structure of the federal income tax 
system.  It prepares students to help with the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program at 
Grace College and provides an introduction to corporate income tax concepts. Prerequisite: ACC 
2110. Three hours. 
 
ACC 3320 Intermediate Managerial Accounting 
This course provides a more in-depth review of managerial accounting concepts including process 
costing, job order costing, economic order quantity, budgeting, and data analytics used to help with 
these processes.  Prerequisite: ACC 2120. Three hours. 
 
ACC3450 Accounting Information Systems 
This course helps students understand how technology is used in accounting to record, report, and 
analyze accounting information.   Prerequisite: ACC 2110. Three hours. 
 
ACC 4110 Advanced Accounting  
The emphasis of this course is business combinations (consolidations) partnerships, estates and trusts, 
and international accounting concepts. Prerequisite: ACC3110. Three hours. 
 
 


ACC 4310 Auditing Principles  
Emphasis on the principles underlying the verification of financial statements by independent public 
accountants and the auditor’s report. Prerequisites: ACC3110 and ACC3120. Three hours. 
 
ACC 4420 Advanced Managerial Accounting 
This course studies more advanced managerial accounting concepts not covered in Intermediate 
Managerial Accounting.  Prerequisite: ACC 3320. Three hours 
 
ACC 4430 Governmental & NFP Accounting 
This course takes an in-depth review of the specifics of how governments are required to report 
accounting information.  It also studies non-for-profit entities and how these organizations report 
information to interested parties since the emphasis of NFP organization is using funds, not 
generating excess profits.  Prerequisite: ACC 3110. Three hours. 
 
ACC 4520 Individual Compliance Planning 
This course is an in-depth study of the tax code for individuals.  It includes tax planning for 
individuals and more complex issues related for Form 1040.  Prerequisite: ACC 3300. Three hours. 
 
ACC4530 Tax Compliance & Planning 
This course is an in-depth study of the tax code related to corporate, partnership, and other 
business entities.  Prerequisite: ACC 3300. Three hours 
 
ACC 4910–4980 Accounting Internship 
Open to qualified junior and senior accounting majors who are placed with cooperating firms to receive 
training in this discipline. Periodic reports and evaluations are submitted by the firm and the student. 
Prerequisite: relevant course work and approval by department chair. One to four hours. (One to eight 
hours Applied Learning Credit) 
ACC 4990 Accounting Internship 
Open to qualified junior and senior accounting majors who are placed with cooperating public 
accounting firms to receive training in this discipline.  Periodic reports and evaluations are submitted by 
the firm and the student.  Prerequisite: relevant course work and approval by department chair.  Nine 
hours. (Nine Applied Learning Credits) 
 
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
 
BUS 1010 Foundations of Business 
Business Foundations serves as a broad overview and introduction to the field of business, as well as to 
the faculty of the School of Business and the academic requirements of the business program at Grace 
College.  This course explores the foundational truths of the marketplace required for our system of 
business to function, although imperfectly, and serve the needs of those around us.  The roles of 
freedom, economics, government, and faith will be key discussion points.  The course examines these 
foundations from a biblical perspective to understand more fully how God would have us “do business.”   
Three hours 
 
 


BUS 2230 Economics 
The role of Christians in the marketplace is discussed with consideration of economic reasoning and 
methodology through examination of fundamental concepts in micro- and macroeconomics and 
through extension and applications of economic theory. Examination of the general functioning of a 
price system using fundamentals of supply and demand is evaluated. Exploration of the variety of 
market forms, theory of factor incomes and the effects of government intervention to promote 
efficiency and equity occurs.  Three hours. 
 
BUS 2750 Entrepreneurship & Service Practicum 
Students will apply concepts learned in common professional component courses to start and run a 
business.  A business plan will be written, a loan obtained and products commercialized within the 
semester.  Each student company will also serve a local nonprofit organization with their time, talent 
and company profits.  Pre/Corequisites: ACC 2110, MGT 2430, & MKT 2150 or permission by the 
instructor.  Three hours.   
 
BUS 3050 Business Spreadsheet Applications 
Students advance their skill and confidence in using the workbook, database and output capabilities of 
Microsoft Excel. Focus is on understanding the advanced features of Excel and key issues of design and 
advanced output capabilities of spreadsheet programs. Three hours. 
 
BUS 3130 Business Law I 
Basic legal principles which control modern business transactions. Deals with such topics as contracts, 
agencies, employment, negotiable instruments, property, sales, and business relations with 
government. Three hours. 
 
BUS 3260 Small Business Entrepreneurship 
Applying the fundamentals of small business to the planning, organizing, leading, and controlling to the 
specific requirements of small business marketing, finance, production, and personnel. Practical application 
and case study are emphasized. Three hours. 
 
BUS 3510 Innovation and Design for Business 
An introduction into the invention, design, and prototype processes leading to the launch of a new 
product.  This includes the importance of new ideas and innovation within the organization with a focus 
on Entrepreneurship, and a discussion of the strategies necessary for challenging innovative concepts 
and driving creativity throughout an organization. Prerequisite: Students must have completed a 
minimum of 60 hours of college credit. Three hours 
 
BUS 3570 Fundamentals of International Business 
An awareness of the global business environment is essential. This survey course introduces various 
facets of international business, its application to the domestic concern, and national economy. Areas 
reviewed include the role and impact of multi-national corporations, cross cultural factors, and global 
strategies. Prerequisite: MGT2430. Three hours. 
 
BUS 3600 Business Plan Competition Practicum 
Develop the skill sets required to create a professionally viable business plan and participate in the 
Business Plan Competition.  These components include the Executive Summary, Company Description, 
Target Market, Competitive Analysis, Marketing and Sales Plan, Operations Plan, Management Team 
and Financials.  Three hours. 
 


BUS 3610 Business Plan Competition Lab 
Receive mentoring from advisors, faculty and Service Core of Retired Executives (SCORE) in a lab setting.  
This includes placing the components of a business plan into a narrative and presentation format for the 
Business Plan Competition held in the Spring semester each school year.   0 hours.    
 
BUS 3630 Methods of Teaching Business 
A presentation of the principles and techniques used in teaching business courses. Includes the study of 
various learning theories as well as various curriculum materials available. Will involve field experiences. 
Three hours. 
 
BUS 3670 Special Topics in Business 
This course in the School of Business offers experimental courses and instructional opportunities before 
putting them into the permanent system.  Occasionally, instruction in cutting edge business topics by 
outside experts will also be offered.  Permission by the Faculty of Record.  One to three hours.  
 
BUS 4220 Biblical Basis of Business 
This course examines the biblical treatment of critical topics in business and economics.  This 
examination provides a foundation for developing a framework for understanding business 
from a biblical perspective and for acting consistently within that perspective.  The course 
develops a macro-level framework for the biblical understanding of the role of business 
organizations and the role of business professionals within those operations.  This course 
complements the micro-level biblical frameworks developed in the discipline specific business 
courses.  This content is designed to challenge the thinking of the student about how they will 
integrate their understanding of scriptural truth into creating an ethical life walk in a business 
setting. Prerequisite: Senior status (within two semesters of graduation) or permission.  Three 
hours. 
 
BUS 4570 Topics in International Business 
This course is intended to integrate the field experiences and presentations by guest faculty in the areas 
of international business with the current developments and literature. Students will be expected to 
prepare analytical reports on the various firms and institutions visited in the program. Major topics 
included in reading and discussion in this course are the role of the multinational firm in the world 
economy, international business strategy, organizational behavior and international investment and 
financial management. Offered in conjunction with International Business Institute. See department 
chair. Prerequisite: completion of junior year. Three hours. 
 
BUS 4710–4730 Practicum in Business 
A course designed to give selected business majors practical experience in a variety of organizational 
settings. Involvement will vary according to the nature of the practicum, type of business consulted and 
the number of hours approved by the practicum committee. Prerequisite: Approval by Dean.  One to 
three hours. (One to Three Applied Learning Credits) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


BUS 4760 Practicum in Business II 
A course designed for the second three-hour experience for selected business majors.  Involvement will 
vary according to the nature of the practicum, type of business consulted and the number of hours 
approved by the practicum committee.  Prerequisite:  Approval by Dean.  Three hours. (Three Applied 
Learning Credits) 
 
BUS 4780 Practicum in Entrepreneurship 
A course designed to give selected business majors practical experience in a variety of entrepreneurial 
settings.  Involvement will vary according to the nature of the practicum, type of business consulted and 
the number of hours approved by the practicum committee.  Prerequisite:  Approval by Dean.  Three 
hours. (Three Applied Learning Credits) 
 
BUS 4800 Senior Seminar in Management 
Students make management decisions on finance, production, and marketing for companies in a 
competitive market, giving consideration to economic forecast, relative position of company, and 
company objectives. The student should have taken most of the major course requirements before 
enrolling in this course. Prerequisite: Senior status (within 2 semesters of graduation) or permission. 
Three hours.  
 
BUS 4910–4940 Business Internship I 
Open to qualified junior and senior business majors who are employed by cooperating firms to receive 
training in business. Periodic reports and evaluations are submitted by the firm and the students. 
Prerequisite: Approval by department chair. Prerequisite:  Approval by Dean.  One to four hours. (One to 
four Applied Learning Credits) 
 
BUS 4950–4960 Business Internship II 
Open to qualified junior and senior business majors who are employed by cooperating firms to receive 
training in business. Periodic reports and evaluations are submitted by the firm and the students. 
Prerequisite: Approval by Dean.  Five or six hours. (Five or six Applied Learning Credits) 
 
FINANCE 
FIN 3170 Money, Banking & Fixed Income 
The study of the principles of money, banking, and credit with emphasis on monetary theory and policy 
and their role in domestic and international economics. Prerequisites: FIN3240. Three hours. 
 
FIN 3240 Corporate Finance 
This foundational course explores corporate financial topics such as financial statement analysis, net 
present value, corporate valuation, the stock market, the bond market, financial governance and the 
role of the CFO in managing a business.  This course provides a practical approach to the discipline. 
Prerequisite: ACC2110. Three hours. 
 
FIN 3270 Financial Planning (cross listed with ACC 3270) 
To acquaint the student with the principles and concepts of basic financial planning and personal 
finance, with both theoretical and personal application.  Dave Ramsey’s College curriculum is used in 
this course.   Prerequisites: ACC2110.  Three hours. 
 
 


FIN 3350 Entrepreneurial Finance 
This course focuses on funding and managing entrepreneurial ventures through the various stages of 
business growth.  The course will develop skills related to the creation and understanding of business 
models and the types of organizations and the various ways these organizations can be financed.  
Students will learn:  1) the value of pro forma financial planning and what if analysis; and 2) the various 
ways to fund and manage a growing firm with a particular emphasis on deal structure and risk/reward 
scenarios for different investor types.  The class will utilize cases based on real world companies from 
various industries to cover topics in investment analysis, financing the entrepreneurial firm, and 
financially managing the growing business.  Prerequisite:  FIN3240.  Three hours. 
 
FIN 4280 Investments 
This course acquaints the student with the principles and concepts of investment portfolios and risk 
management. The student will learn about stocks, bonds, options and futures and the associated risks 
and potential returns of these investment alternatives.  The student will learn about the importance of 
diversification and the level of risk taking according to their own particular level of risk preference. 
Prerequisite: FIN3240. Three hours. 
 
FIN 4530 International Finance & Economics 
 
The course explores international finance in business, including strategy and motivation for direct 
foreign investment, international banking operations, lending and investment criteria, governmental 
programs to encourage exports, trade restrictions, foreign currency markets and exchange controls.  The 
course also covers why and how countries trade with each other. Topics include exchange rates, 
comparative advantage, tariffs and quotas and other trade restrictions, trade agreements, and the 
relation between trade and economic growth. Special problems of multinational firms are discussed.  
Prerequisite: FIN3240.  Three hours. 
FIN 4610 Advanced Financial Topics & Math 
This course is designed to provide a practical application of corporate finance and mathematic skills to a 
variety of analyses commonly performed by CFO’s, investment bankers, actuaries, and corporate 
financial analysts.  Students will gather source data, and build and apply models typically used in 
practice.  This course also investigates the use of financial instruments and strategies to achieve a 
sustainable competitive advantage and create value.  The course explores the relationships amongst 
corporate strategy, corporate finance, and financial innovation.  Prerequisite:  FIN3240 and 3 hours in 
other FIN courses.  Three hours. 
 
FIN 4930 Internship in Finance 
Open to qualified junior & senior finance majors who are placed with cooperating firms to receive 
training in this discipline.  Periodic reports and evaluations are submitted by the student.  Prerequisite: 
relevant course work & approval by the Dean.  Three hours.  (Three Applied Learning Credits)  
 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
CSI 1151 Introduction to Computer Science 
This course exposes students to essential computer science topics including algorithms and introductory 
programming concepts including sequence, decision, and assignment and iteration.  This course 
assumes no prior knowledge. (BS Core elective – cross listed with ISM 1150) Three hours. 
 


ISM 1150 Introduction to Computer Science 
This course exposes students to essential computer science topics including algorithms and introductory 
programming concepts including sequence, decision, and assignment and iteration.  This course 
assumes no prior knowledge. Three hours. 
 
ISM 2150 Object-Oriented Computer Programming 
This course builds on the concepts learned in ISM1150. Students will use an object-oriented 
programming language to build programs that solve given problems. Prerequisite: ISM1150. Three 
hours. 
 
ISM 2200 Introduction to Networking 
This course is designed to introduce the student to the rapidly changing networking and data 
communications arena. Topics covered include the OSI model, LAN and WAN hardware and software, 
networked operating systems, protocols, design, and implementation. Prerequisite: ISM1150. Three 
hours. 
 
ISM 2700 HTML and Web Development 
This course will focus on the creation, modification and implementation of Web pages using HTML and 
CSS. At successful completion of the course, the student will be able to design, build, and implement Web 
sites. Three hours. 
 
ISM 3470 Business Information Systems 
This course focuses on the management of information systems within an organizational setting.  During 
the course, students will experience the systems development life cycle as they create an information 
system.  The course utilizes both object oriented and traditional methods for creating business models.  
Prerequisite:  ISM2150, ISM3400.  Three hours. 
 
ISM 3500 Data Structures 
A discussion of fundamental data structures and algorithms for implementing them.  Includes coverage 
of stacks, queues, lists and trees along with algorithms for implementing these structures as a problem 
solution.  Prerequisites:  ISM2150, ISM3400.  Three hours. 
 
ISM 3710 Special Topics in Information Systems 
Given the dynamic nature of the Information System discipline, this course will allow us to offer 
instruction in cutting edge information system topics.  This course also allows the School of Business to 
offer experimental courses and instructional opportunities.  Permission by the Faculty of Record.  One 
hour. 
 
ISM 3720 Special Topics in Information Systems 
Given the dynamic nature of the Information System discipline, this course will allow us to offer 
instruction in cutting edge information system topics.  This course also allows the School of Business to 
offer experimental courses and instructional opportunities.  Permission by the Faculty of Record.  Two 
hours. 
 
 
 


ISM 3730 Special Topics in Information Systems 
Given the dynamic nature of the Information System discipline, this course will allow us to offer 
instruction in cutting edge information system topics.  This course also allows the School of Business to 
offer experimental courses and instructional opportunities.  Permission by the Faculty of Record.  Three 
hours. 
 
ISM 3800 Database Programming 
Students will learn a database language (sql) and then integrate it into programs that result in data-
driven web applications.  Prerequisites: ISM1150 or CSI1150, ISM2150 and ISM2700.  Three hours. 
 
ISM 3910 - 3930 Independent Study in Information Systems 
A directed study within a specific Information Systems or Computing topic.  Prerequisite:  Approval by 
department chair.  One to three hours. 
 
ISM 4110 Client-side Programming 
Students will synthesize topics from a number of previous courses while focusing on the creation and 
implementation of browser-based client side applications.  The focus of the course will be manipulation 
of the document object model using a client-side scripting language.  Prerequisites:  ISM2150, ISM2700 
and ISM3400.  Three hours. 
 
ISM 4200 Application Development Lab 
In this course, students will select, design, and develop a software application that solves a real-world 
problem. Prerequisite: ISM3800 or Instructor permission.  Three hours. 
 
ISM 4930 Internship in Information Systems 
Open to qualified junior and senior information systems majors and minors who are employed by 
cooperating firms to receive training in the organizational use of information systems.  Periodic reports 
and evaluations are submitted by the firm and the student.  Prerequisite:  Approval by Dean.  Three 
hours. 

MGT 2430 Principles of Management 
Principles of Management will expose students to the history of management thought. It also 
introduces students to the principles of management from the perspective of planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling.  Within a biblical framework, this course examines 
developments from scientific management to ethics, diversity, social responsibility, and 
glocalization.  Three hours. 
 
MGT 2650 Leadership & Motivation 
Students in this course will study theories of motivation, leadership and management.  The course will 
present current and recent trends in leadership and motivation, and provide discussion as to the 
viability of these theories in the workplace as well as how well these concepts integrate with a Biblical 
World View.  Three hours. 
 
 


 
MGT 3310 Global Supply Chain Management  
The study of global supply chain management including topics such as purchasing, logistics, inventory 
management, risk analysis and contingency planning.  Environmental, social, governance, flexibility and 
financial criteria for global supply chains will be addressed.  
 
MGT 3405 Organizational Behavior 
This course deals with human behavior in organizations. Conceptual frameworks, case discussions, and 
skill-oriented activities are applied to course topics which include: motivation, learning and 
development, group dynamics, leadership, communication, power and influence, change, diversity, 
organizational design, and culture. Class sessions and assignments are intended to help participants 
acquire skills and analytic concepts to improve organizational relationships and effectiveness. The 
course also examines selected personnel functions in an organization including job analysis, recruitment, 
and hiring, training, performance appraisal, and compensation.  Three hours. 
 
MGT 3450 Introduction to Data Analytics 
In this course, students are introduced to Data Analytics by learning to retrieve data (SQL), prepare data 
(Excel), Analyze data using statistical methods, and report data.  Prerequisite: BUS3050. Three hours.  
 
MGT 3480 Operations & Production Management 
The course studies the theory and practice of managing the production environment including plant 
layout and best practices in production. Prerequisite: BUS2430. Three hours. 
 
MGT 4240 Human Resource Management 
An examination of the personnel functions in the business organization, particularly job analysis, 
recruitment and hiring, training, performance appraisal, compensation, the psychological forces 
motivating workers, discipline, and morale within a heightened awareness of legislative and regulatory 
oversight.  Prerequisite: BUS2430.  Three hours. 
 
MARKETING 
 
MKT 2150 Marketing Principles 
This course provides a decision-oriented overview of marketing management in modern organizations. 
The objectives of the course are to provide a broad introduction to marketing concepts, the role of 
marketing in society and in the firm, and the various factors that influence marketing decision making. 
Three hours. 
 
MKT 2500 Digital/Internet Marketing 
This course will give students a foundation for understanding the importance of digital marketing in 
today’s business environment.  Students will gain a basic understanding of how organizations can drive 
revenue and ROI through the user experience, attract customers through multiple digital channels, build 
smart websites and mobile experiences, and produce rich media for marketing and advertising.  The 
course will cover the fundamentals of online, content marketing, and mobile marketing, SEO, content 
management systems (CMS), social media and analytics.  Prerequisite: MKT 2150. Three hours. 
 
 
 


 
MKT 2600 Online Advertising & Email Marketing 
Students learn about today’s online marketing techniques, how to develop a successful online campaign 
across all digital channels, and ways to measure the success of the campaign.  Emphasis is placed on 
social, search, mobile, display, email, and relevant analytical tools and metrics.  Prerequisite: MKT2500.  
Three hours. 
 
MKT 3000 Social Community & Content Marketing 
This course evaluates how content can be used as a differential advantage and as a way to create lasting 
relationships with customers. The goal of this course is to show how to develop, implement, and 
measure a successful content marketing strategy across multiple digital channels to attract, engage and 
retain a profitable market.  Prerequisite: MKT2500. Three hours. 
 
MKT 3270 Consumer Behavior 
This course introduces the student to the psychological, sociological, cultural and economic 
determinants of consumer behavior.  The course is structured around a framework of cognitive, 
behavioral and environmental issues surrounding consumer choice and the creation of marketing 
strategies to influence those choices.  A Biblical framework for ethical use of these theories is explored 
throughout the course.  Prerequisite:  MKT 2150.  Three hours. 
 
MKT 3430 Advertising and Promotion 
This course examines the approach to developing advertising/promotion strategy; the theory and 
practices of advertising and promotion; the use of advertising as a creative process; evaluation of the 
effectiveness of advertising; and the role of advertising and promotion in our society. Emphasis is placed 
on the relationship advertising has within the overall marketing programs, as well as promotion mix, 
decision tools, and ethical consideration. Prerequisite: MKT2150. Three hours. 
 
MKT 3550 Services & Nonprofit Marketing 
This course examines the ways in which marketing for service related and not for profit organizations 
differ from marketing tangible goods with a profit motive.  Development of the knowledge, skills and 
attitudes necessary to market Services and the special category of NPO’s is emphasized.  Application of 
course material is made to a wide range of services and NPO’s.  Prerequisite: MKT 2150 or permission of 
the Instructor for non-majors.  Three hours.  
 
MKT 4100 Product Management 
Best described as a general management at the intersection of technology, business and the customer, 
product management is typically organized as a marketing function.  The aim of this course is to expose 
students to product management as a career field, preview the essential tools and skills used by product 
managers, and help students develop a biblical philosophy of personal influence and leadership.  
Prerequisite: MKT2150. Three hours. 
 
MKT 4150 Marketing Research 
This course is an introductory study of the practical considerations of selecting research methodology 
and techniques used in marketing research. Emphasis is placed on the terminology, concepts, 
procedures, statistical techniques, and ethics involved in collecting, analyzing, and interpreting 
marketing data. The course also emphasizes the study of the format and content of marketing research 
reports that address the concerns of decision makers. Prerequisite: MKT2150. Three hours. 
 
 


 
MKT 4170 Advanced Marketing 
A case method course using real world marketing dilemmas as a means to learn how to apply marketing 
principles into a workable solution. The course also focuses on the fundamental concepts of strategy, its 
creation, execution and evaluation, plus learning the technical and relationship skills to manage the process. 
Prerequisite: Senior status (final Spring Semester on campus) or permission. Three hours. 
 
MKT 4190 Sales/Sales Management 
A practical approach of learning the sales function of a business organization. Emphasis is placed on exploring 
techniques, issues and ethics pertinent to sales analysis, territory alignment, presentations, and analysis. 
Prerequisite: MKT2150. Three hours. 
 
MKT 4200 Advanced Digital Marketing 
A case method course, using real world marketing dilemmas as a means to learn how to apply digital 
marketing principles into a workable solution.  The course also focuses on preparing the student for the 
American Marketing Association PCM®, digital marketing certification. Prerequisite:  Senior status or 
permission.  Three Hours. 
 
MKT 4300 International Marketing 
The International Marketing course is designed to demonstrate how businesses can expand their marketing 
efforts globally while acting regionally (globalization).  The course examines the factors businesses must 
understand when expanding into other countries, and the important considerations necessary to successfully 
implement a global marketing strategy (GMS0.  It is built around how general marketing principles, such as 
the 4P’s, are utilized by companies to effectively market globally.  Prerequisite:  MKT2150, BUS3570 or 
permission of the instructor. Three hours. 
 
 
SMT 1100 Introduction to Sport Management 
An introductory course to the Sport Management major.  The course focuses on curriculum selection, 
applied learning experiences, and career options.  A study of the history of sport is also a central part of 
the class.  Three hours. 
 
SMT1140 Practicum in Sport Management I 
Practical experience in areas related to Sport Management businesses and settings.   Three hours.  
(Three Applied Learning Credits) 
 
SMT2050 Risk Management 
The nature of today’s litigious society makes it imperative that the sport management student be 
familiar with the special issues of law related to sport. Topics include tort law, risk management, 
contract law, the legal system, and facility/event supervision. Special emphasis will be given to current 
legal issues and application of risk management principles. Three hours. 
 
SMT2090 Practicum in Sport Management II 
Practical experience in areas related to Sport Management businesses and settings.  Prerequisite:  
SMT2050.  Three hours.  (Three Applied Learning Credits) 

SMT2320 Facility Management 
In this course the student will study the entire scope of facility management including facility planning, 
construction, budgeting, facility operations, and facility supervision. Prerequisite: SMT2050. Three 
hours. 
 
SMT3060 Event Management 
This course is a practical approach to event management. Event planning, sponsorship, budgeting, 
management, and evaluation will be emphasized. Events require a great deal of expertise and planning. 
Society demands that events be run professionally and efficiently. Prerequisites:  SMT 2050.  Three 
hours. 
 
SMT 3080 Event Management Lab 
This course is the lab for SMT 3060.  The students will conduct the event planned in SMT 3060.  
Prerequisite:  SMT 3060.  0 hours.  
 
SMT3550 Sport in American Society 
An investigation of the impact sport has on the American way of life. Emphasizes the social institution of 
sport as it relates to other institutions and the impact sport has on the general public. Three hours. 
 
SMT3610 Sport Marketing 
This course will explore the areas of finance, fund-raising, and marketing related to sport organizations. 
The emphasis of this course will be on marketing related to facilities, programs, and sport organizations. 
Three hours. 
 
SMT4000 Sport Media 
A study of the emergence and significance of sport in the media.  The student will gain expertise in the 
areas of sport journalism, sport communications, and the ever-changing technology that covers sport.  
Three hours. 
 
SMT4200 Sport Governance 
A capstone course for the sport management major. This course deals with issues relevant to the 
governance of sport, fitness and health.  Various sport governance organizations and structures will be 
analyzed.  Three hours.  
SMT4810–4830 Research in Sport Management 
Open to individuals completing a sport management major. Prerequisite: permission of the department. 
One to three hours. 
 
SMT 4930 Internship in Sport Management 
The internship includes activity in a work site situation giving the student a hands-on opportunity to 
apply the principles learned in class in a real-world setting. Permission of the department. Three hours.  
(Three Applied Learning Credits) 
 

 
 
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION COURSES 
Students must earn a C or better in SED courses, unless otherwise noted.   
SED 1000 Teaching School in America 
An introduction to the profession of teaching.  Learning experiences are structured both in and out of 
the classroom with the purpose of assisting the college student in making career decisions relative to 
the profession, e.g., to teach or not, at which level, and in which subject area.  Students observe in local 
schools.   Three hours.  A grade of B- or better is required to reach candidacy status.   
SED 2210 Responsive and Differentiated Instruction for All Learners  
The purpose of this course is to develop a working knowledge of responsive instruction by applying 
differentiation strategies and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles. Students will learn to 
promote all students’ development, learning, and success through ongoing assessment that informs 
instruction. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisite: SED 1000, candidacy status. Three 
hours.   
 
SED 2200 The School Age Child 
A study of the learner at all grade levels and the many factors affecting learning, including but not 
limited to, theories of learning, environment, heredity, cultural impact, discipline, classroom 
management, exceptionalities, and development. The measurement of academic aptitude and 
achievement is also covered.  Practical application is stressed.  Prerequisite: SED 1000.  Three hours.  
 
SED 2400 Teaching Exceptional Learners 
This course is designed to develop an understanding of children with disabilities, especially in an 
educational setting.  It provides an introduction to the field of special education, but it is also helpful to 
the regular classroom teacher. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisite: SED 1000.  Three 
hours.   
 
SED 2500 Teaching in a Pluralistic Society 
This course develops understanding and skill for working with children and parents who come from 
diverse backgrounds.  Areas of diversity include race, ethnicity, native language, culture, class, gender, 
age, religion, and ability.  The focus is on increasing knowledge and respect for the diverse child in the 
classroom setting.  Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisite: SED 1000.  Three hours.   
 
SED 2600 Teaching and Learning 
Common elements are taught to both elementary and secondary majors with techniques specific to 
each covered. Students develop a repertoire of methods and strategies appropriate to their major and 
teaching level. Students will also survey strategies, techniques and skills for managing a classroom, as 
well as construct and analyze tests and evaluation tools for classroom teachers.  Field experience is 
required. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2200. Three hours.   
 
SED 4700 The Moral Practitioner 
An examination of the historical and philosophical foundations of American education. Study is made of 
the relationships between one’s philosophy of education and his/her interpretation and analysis of 
educational aims, problems, and activities. Philosophical systems are applied to classroom scenarios. 
Exposure to and experience with professional societies in education, community agencies and legal 
concerns will address INTASC and IDOE standards for the teacher’s professional role. Subscription to 

 
Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisite. All SED course work completed, additional school requirements 
met. Three hours.   
 
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION COURSE TOTAL:  18 credits 
SECONDARY EDUCATION MAJORS (GRADES 5-12) 
Students must earn a grade of C or better in SED courses, unless otherwise noted.   
SED 2210 Responsive and Differentiated Instruction for All Learners  
The purpose of this course is to develop a working knowledge of responsive instruction by applying 
differentiation strategies and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles. Students will learn to 
promote all students’ development, learning, and success through ongoing assessment that informs 
instruction. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisite: SED 1000, candidacy status. Three 
hours. 
SED 3600 Teaching in the Middle and High School 
This course is designed to give the student an introduction to middle school and high school theory and 
practice. Specific characteristics of the middle school and high school are studied with application where 
appropriate. Specific topics include curriculum development, lesson preparation, meeting individual 
differences, implementing instructional strategies, using aids and resources, classroom management, 
and evaluation techniques. Much of the course is dedicated to describing academic effectiveness and 
developmentally appropriate strategies.  Field experience is required. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is 
required. Prerequisites: SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 2600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4610 Methods of Teaching Business 
This course is a presentation of the principles and techniques used in teaching business courses. 
Included is the study of various learning theories as well as various curriculum materials available.  Field 
experience is involved. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisites:  SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 
2600, SED 3600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4620 Methods of Teaching Secondary English 
The course is a study of the philosophy, curriculum, and methods of teaching English on the secondary 
level, concentrating upon skills, knowledge, and dispositions which need to be possessed by the teacher 
and fostered among students. Tutorial and observational contact with the secondary school is an 
integral part of the course. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisites:  SED 1000, SED 2200, 
SED 2600, SED 3600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4630 Methods of Teaching Foreign Language 
This course is a study of curriculum and methods of teaching a foreign language on both the elementary 
and secondary level, with special emphasis on performance objectives and methodology with classroom 
practice.  Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required. Prerequisites: SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 2600, SED 
3600, candidacy status.  Three hours.  
 
SED 4650 Methods of Teaching Secondary Mathematics 
This course is designed to help prepare the future high school teacher for his or her career in the 
classroom. We investigate the standard high school math curriculum and study methods of teaching 
mathematical concepts to students at various levels within the curriculum. Subscription to Chalk & Wire 
is required. Prerequisites:   SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 2600, SED 3600, candidacy status. Three hours.   

 
 
SED 4660 Methods of Teaching Secondary Science 
This course is a study of the curriculum and methods of teaching sciences on the secondary level. 
Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites:  SED 1000, SED 2200, SED 2600, SED 3600, 
candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4670 Methods of Teaching Secondary Social Studies 
This course is a study of practical methods and materials in the broad areas of social studies education. 
Students will learn many classroom techniques and thus create a repertoire of methods appropriate for 
the secondary levels of education. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: SED 1000, 
SED 2200, SED 2600, SED 3600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4900 Student Teaching and Seminar 
Includes full-time teaching experience for an entire semester as well as a seminar for majors during the 
experience.  This course deals with a variety of topics and issues especially germane to candidates who 
are about to enter the teaching profession.   Each candidate enrolled in this course will be required to 
complete a Teacher Work Sample and earn a passing score of C or better.  Prerequisites: All SED course 
work completed, additional school requirements met. Nine hours.   
 
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION MAJORS (Grades K-6) 
Students must earn a grade of C or better in SED courses, unless otherwise noted. 
 
SED 1110 Foundations of Mathematics 
This course investigates a variety of topics necessary for future elementary school teachers. 
Topics covered include numbers, measurement, probability, statistics, geometry, patterns, 
spatial relationships, and logic. This is not a methods class; it is a mathematics content 
class. Prerequisites: 12 credit hours; Basic Algebra and SED 1000. Three credit hours 
 
 
 
SED 3310 Literacy I (Foundations of Reading) 
This course is designed to teach prospective elementary teachers to understand the foundations of 
reading development grounded in scientifically based reading research. Candidates will comprehend 
sound-symbol relationships of the English language that will lead to the attainment of independence in 
reading. The basics of phonemic blending, as well as the basics of decoding written words, are 
presented. Philosophies and strategies for teaching the skills of phonics are included.  There is emphasis 
on development of literacy through language and listening, reading, and writing while integrating skills 
from the other curriculum content areas. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: 
SED1000, candidacy status. Three hours. 
 
SED 3320 Literacy II (Literature and Writing) 
This course is a survey of literature for children from preschool through sixth grade, including a study of 
objective standards and evaluation. A wide reading of children’s books, traditional and modern, and the 
development of an appreciation of prose and poetry suitable for children of different ages is expected. 
Writing techniques will also be addressed as candidates identify evidence-based practices used to create 
a literacy-rich classroom environment.  Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: SED 
1000, SED 3310, candidacy status. Three hours.  

 
 
SED 3330 Literacy III (Diagnosis and Correction) 
This course is a study of the various approaches to reading, methods of instruction, and foundations for 
reading in the content areas. Instruction in the use of reading tests and diagnostic procedures for 
remediation is included. Candidates will understand the components of effective differentiated reading 
instruction to meet the needs of all learners and recognize the components of and need for evidence-
based intervention programs. Students participate in teaching and testing in the local schools. 
Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: SED1000, SED 3310, SED 3320, candidacy status. 
Three hours.   
 
SED 3331 Literacy III Practicum 
Candidates spend Wednesday mornings in K-6 classrooms teaching whole and small group lessons. 
Candidates will foster learning through interactive read aloud, guided reading, and writing lessons. 
Candidates are supervised by college faculty and K-6 classroom teachers. 
 
SED 3800 Classroom Assessment and Environment 
This course presents best practices in classroom assessment, environment, and behavior management.  
Topics include relationship development, organization of the classroom learning environment, 
classroom procedure development, and approaches for managing individual and large group student 
behaviors.  Various strategies to instruction and assessment will be explored.  Candidates will develop 
and teach lessons utilizing formative and summative assessment tools.  Candidates will understand how 
these assessments inform the teaching and learning process. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  
Prerequisites: SED1000, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4210 Methods of Teaching Mathematics 
This course involves an examination of the instructional process appropriate for elementary children in 
their learning of mathematics. Considerable time is spent with the actual content of the elementary 
curriculum. Methods that facilitate evidence-based instruction in mathematical concepts, skills, problem 
solving, and critical thinking are developed along with the content. Candidates will practice strategies 
and skills for effectively assessing students’ mastery of concepts and skills using Response to 
Intervention procedures. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: SED 1000, SED 1110, 
SED 2200, SED 2600, candidacy status. Three hours.  
 
SED 4230 Methods of Teaching Science, Health, and Physical Education 
This course evaluates methods and materials needed for teaching science, health and physical 
education.  A large emphasis will be placed on STEM and the learning theories, techniques, process 
skills, and laboratory work in the field of science.  Students will observe and teach on the local STEM 
bus.  Integration among health and physical education across the curriculum will be included.  Course 
content is based on the Indiana Academic Standards and Core Standards.  Individual and group units of 
study are prepared. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisites: SED1000, SED 2200, 
SED2600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 4240 Methods of Teaching Social Studies and Fine Arts 
This course of study investigates various teaching techniques, learning theories, and curriculum 
materials necessary to teach social studies.  Music, visual arts, dance, and drama will provide the base to 
create evidence-based methods of teaching and integrating of the arts within the elementary classroom.  
Course content is based on the Indiana Academic Standards, Core Standards, and Pearson Professional 

 
Tests.  Individual and group units of study are prepared.  Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  
Prerequisites: SED1000, SED 2200, SED2600, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
 
SED 4310 Methods of Teaching Language Arts 
This course involves a broad and comprehensive understanding of the fundamental concepts and 
processes of expressive and receptive language. The Indiana State and Core Standards are addressed as 
evidence-based instructional strategies in the areas of oral and written communication, listening, 
spelling, and handwriting are introduced. There is concentration on collecting ideas and materials. 
Students observe in local schools. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.   Prerequisites: SED1000, SED 
2200, SED2600, candidacy status. Three hours.  
 
SED 4311 Methods Block Practicum 
Candidates participate in the analysis, planning, and instruction of language arts curriculum to 
elementary students with and without exceptional needs. Candidates spend Mondays in K-6 classrooms 
teaching within a rich literacy framework. Candidates analyze data and teach whole and small group 
lessons. Candidates are supervised by college faculty and K-6 classroom teachers. 

ELEMENTARY & SPECIAL EDUCATION (DUAL LICENSURE PROGRAM)  
Students must earn a grade of C or better in SED courses, unless otherwise noted. 
SED 1110 Foundations of Mathematics 
This course investigates a variety of topics necessary for future elementary school teachers. 
Topics covered include numbers, measurement, probability, statistics, geometry, patterns, 
spatial relationships, and logic. This is not a methods class; it is a mathematics content 
class. Prerequisites: 12 credit hours; Basic Algebra and SED 1000. Three credit hours  
 
SED 2410 Policy & Practices in Special Education 
This course is an introductory study of historical, political, and socio-cultural influences in special 
education. Students will develop an understanding of the implications of special education policy for 
learners with exceptional needs.  This course also includes an in-depth study of the etiology and 
characteristics of high-incidence disabilities, including learning disabilities, behavioral disorders, 
emotional disabilities, and mild cognitive disabilities.  Also addressed are identification and eligibility 
considerations in special education.  Practices covered include least restrictive environment, response to 
intervention, and the IEP process. Membership in CEC is required. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is 
required.  Prerequisite: SED 1000 and SED 2400. Three hours.   
 
SED 2420 Strategies for Mild Intervention 
This course focuses on providing mild intervention to the K-6 student with learning and behavioral 
needs.  This includes educational organization, curricular modifications, and research-based 
instructional strategies.  Students learn to individualize instruction based on the individualized education 
plan.  Students have the opportunity to apply course knowledge through applied learning experiences. 
Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.   Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 and SED 2410. Three hours.   
 
SED 2421 Strategies for Mild Intervention Practicum 
Clinical practicum for SED 2420. Candidates apply knowledge in authentic experiences supervised by 
fully licensed teachers in mild intervention. Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 and SED 2410.   
 
SED 3410 Teaching Students with Emotional and Behavioral Problems 
This course deals with issues of definition, incidence, and prevalence of emotional and behavioral 
disabilities. Students will learn how to implement positive behavior supports and interventions to 
improve behaviors and socialization.  Students apply knowledge through a behavior change project in an 
applied learning experience. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 
and SED 2420, candidacy status. Three hours.   
 
SED 3411 Teaching Students with Emotional and Behavioral Problems Practicum 
Clinical practicum for SED 3410. Candidates apply knowledge by participating in residential and self-
contained settings for students with emotional and behavioral disabilities. These experiences are 
supervised by fully licensed teachers. Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 and SED 2420, candidacy status. 

 
 
SED 3420 Inclusion & Collaboration 
This course is a study of the integration of special education in the regular classroom setting. Service 
delivery models for students with special needs are identified and explored. Importance is placed on 
collaborative procedures, special services and instructional modifications that regular and special 
education teachers use to meet the learning needs of special needs students in regular education 
classes. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 and SED 2420, 
candidacy status. Three hours.  
 
SED 4420 Assessment, Evaluation & Remediation of Students with Exceptional Needs 
This course is a study of the principles and practices of diagnostic procedures in special education. 
Formal and informal assessments, standardized tests, test administration, test interpretation and 
summary writing in the academic areas of reading, math, and written expression are examined. Utilizing 
assessment as a means for formulating educational goals and instructional objectives are explored. 
Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisite: SED 1000, SED 2400 and SED 2420, candidacy 
status.  Three hours.  
 
SED 4430 Seminar in Secondary Special Education 
This course addresses topics in secondary special education. The focus of this course is on transition 
models, individualized transition plans, assistive technologies, and instructional strategies specific to 
secondary students with disabilities needing mild intervention.  Students will explore inter-agencies, 
community, and vocational services that support transition into adulthood.  30-36-hour practicum in 
secondary special education is also required. Subscription to Chalk & Wire is required.  Prerequisite: SED 
1000, SED 2400 and SED 2420, candidacy status.  Three hours.  
 
SED 4431 Practicum for Secondary Special Education 
Students will participate in a 30-36-hour practicum in secondary special education.  This practicum will 
be integrated into SED 4430.  Students will apply their knowledge and skills in a secondary special 
education setting and will be expected to participate in transition planning, instruction, and typical tasks 
required of secondary special educators. 
 
for INTENSE INTERVENTION 
 
SED 5450 Policy & Practices in Intense Intervention 
This course provides an in-depth study of the cognitive, social, communication, and learning 
characteristics and development of students with intense or complex support needs. These 
exceptionalities include moderate and severe cognitive disabilities, severe emotional disorders, multiple 
disabilities, orthopedic impairments, autism, and traumatic brain injury. Academic, communication and 
functional needs as related to disabilities are explored. Etiology, definitions, and diagnostic criteria as 
well as federally mandated eligibility requirements are explored. Discussion focuses on implications for 
instruction, intervention, and related services for individuals with significant disabilities. These 
implications are studied through significant historical, social, political, cultural and legal perspectives. 
Also includes application of professional and ethical practice within the field of special education. Three 
hours.  
 
SED 5460 Assessment, Instruction & Intervention Supports for Significant Disabilities 
This course will employ an evidence-based approach to assessment, instruction, and intervention for 
students with significant disabilities. Students will learn to move from research to practice by developing 

 
a broad and comprehensive understanding of formal and informal assessments and interpretation of 
assessment data with an emphasis on formative assessment and progress monitoring. Application of 
knowledge and understanding will be expected through individualized program planning and 
implementation of effective instruction that aligns to alternate academic standards and meets the 
unique needs of individuals with significant disabilities. Instruction and intervention development with a 
focus on language and communication needs is an overarching theme in this course. Prerequisite SED 
5450. Three hours.  
 
 
SED 5470 Seminar in Intense Intervention: Communication, Behavior & Health 
Designed as an exploration of key components in meeting the complex needs of individuals. Students 
learn and apply principles of positive behavior interventions and supports, understand the implications 
of health issues related to significant disabilities, and learn to use augmentative and assistive technology 
to meet communication needs. Prerequisite SED 5460. Three hours.  
 
SED 5480 Collaboration & Transition Across the Life Span 
A study of the transition needs for individuals with significant disabilities and the collaborative strategies 
necessary to meet those needs as they occur across the life span. This course teaches students how to 
assess and support the transition needs of students and their families through the federally mandated 
transition planning process. Students apply these skills through case study, writing a transition plan, and 
developing curriculum that focuses on postsecondary outcomes. Topics of interagency collaboration, 
curriculum development, cultural competency, and community-based instruction are explored.  
Prerequisite SED 5470. Three hours. 
 
SED 5490 Clinical Practice in Intense Intervention 
Field-based experience in a school setting that requires intense intervention and supports. Practicum is 
under the direction of a faculty member. Prerequisite SED 5480. 
 
BBL 2011 Understanding the Old Testament I 
An introduction to the Pentateuch and the Historical Books of the Old Testament with special reference 
to background, historical setting, literary composition, theology and message. After successfully 
completing this course, the student should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues 
which introduce one to the study of various concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each 
Old Testament book studied, the purpose and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the 
use of the Old Testament in modern ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the 
New Testament. Three hours. 
 
BBL 2013 Understanding the Old Testament II 
An introduction to the Poetic and Prophetic books of the Old Testament with special reference to 
background, historical setting, literary composition, theology and message. After successfully 
completing this course, the student should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues 
which introduce one to the study of various concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each 
Old Testament book studied, the purpose and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the 
use of the Old Testament in modern ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the 
New Testament. Three hours. 
 
BBL 2020 Understanding the New Testament 
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology, and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be able to 
demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various concepts of the 
New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the purpose and general content 
of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New and Old Testaments, and the use of 
the New Testament in modern ministry. Three hours. 
 
BBL 3000 Theological Systems 
Students will explore the theological methods and presuppositions practiced by the diversity of 
theological systems. Students will seek answers to questions such as, how is presuppositional 
apologetics different from evidential apologetics. How is systematic theology different from biblical 
theology? How is dispensational theology different from covenant theology? How is reformed theology 
different from Armenian theology? How is progressive dispensationalism different from classic 
dispensationalism? Students will study the methods and presuppositions of leading theologians, from 
the Apostle Paul to the present. Prerequisite: BIB1050. This is an upper level course available to juniors 
and seniors. It is also offered at a graduate level. Three hours. 
 

 
BBL 3010 Defining Doctrines of the Christian Faith 
Students will identify the central affirmations of Christianity that distinguish orthodoxy from heresy, 
heterodoxy, liberalism, and neo-orthodoxy. Students will be able to support each defining doctrine from 
Scripture. The role of creeds, church councils, and doctrinal statements in defining and preserving 
orthodoxy will be explored. Students will appreciate the diversity within Christian orthodoxy, while the 
central affirmations are preserved. Prerequisite: BIB1050. Three hours. 
 
BBL 3090 Spiritual Formation 
Students will explore the various dynamics that converge to produce maturity in the life of a Christian. 
They will seek to construct a theory of spiritual formation based on a practical knowledge of God, a 
realistic awareness of self, a full-orbed understanding of pertinent scriptural insights, and a historical 
perspective of various approaches to spirituality. They will examine the necessity of the integration of 
the individual pursuit of spiritual maturity with the corporate dimension. The approach of the course will 
include practical application along with classroom discussion and outside research. Prerequisite: BIB 
2010. Three hours. 
 
BBL 3140 Biblical Backgrounds 
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the OT, NT and Intertestamental Periods.  Special emphasis will be placed on key people groups 
and political, cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the Bible.  
Students will learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, archaeology, sociology, 
philosophy, politics, literature, and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and 
culture of the people to whom it was addressed.  Three hours. 
 
BBL 4310 Women and Scripture 
Students will explore the various roles women played in the OT against the backdrop of the ancient 
world. They will investigate ways that Jesus elevated the status of women and how NT passages 
describe the function of women within the Christian community. Using modern theories on the role of 
women—hierarchical, complementarian, and egalitarian—students will seek to define a biblical 
approach to contemporary questions about the role of women. Three hours. 
 
BBL 4810 Senior Seminar  
This course is designed to facilitate senior level students in the application of theory to ministry practice. 
The learner will be challenged to integrate biblical/theological knowledge gained in a variety of courses 
together with specialized research that pertains to specific ministry issues. Three hours. 
 
BIB 1050 Exploring the Bible 
A general overview of the Bible which orients the student to the overall presentation of the program of 
God from the Creation through the Consummation of Christ. Emphasis will be placed on the themes, 
timeline, structure, and coherence of the entire Biblical revelation. This course is required in the liberal 
arts core curriculum. Three hours. 
 
BIB 2010 Scripture and Interpretation 
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and small group Bible 
study leadership. Observational skills of the English text will be developed through hands-on activities 
and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical genres with the goal of 
equipping the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary context. 

 
Application of meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. Prerequisite: 
BIB1050. This course is required in the liberal arts curriculum. Three hours. 
 
BIB 2050 Understanding and Engaging Culture 
This course examines culture.  It explores the roots of culture as a foundational and overarching 
expression of humanities vocations as “imaging” of God in Scripture. The subsequent harmonies and 
dissonances between historical expressions of culture and Christianity are analyzed and discussed.  Also, 
contemporary expressions of popular digital culture, film, video and music, will be selectively surveyed 
with an eye to developing the capacity to constructively and critically engage culture as 
Christians.  Three hours. 
 
BIB 2090 Contemporary Issues 
Students will interact with controversial issues facing young Christians, weighing carefully biblical and 
ethical criteria for those issues. Careful distinction will be made between explicit biblical teaching, 
traditional Christian practices, and personal convictions. Typical issues to be analyzed in the course 
include: decision making and the will of God, spiritual gifts, gender issues, media and culture, sexuality 
and alternative lifestyles. Three hours. 
 
BIB 2140 Evangelism and Discipleship 
Students will explore foundational issues for developing an approach to evangelism. Questions that will be 
considered include: What constitutes true conversion? Is becoming a Christian a process or an event? What 
about lordship salvation? What is the relationship between evangelism and the sovereignty of God? How do 
trends and needs in society shape a strategy for evangelism? Second, students will examine various methods 
of evangelism, for example, lifestyle evangelism. Third, students will study the concept and methods of 
discipleship as an integral part of evangelism.. Three hours. 
 
BIB 2310 History of Christianity 
Students will seek to discover what transpired in Christianity from the 1st century to modern times in 
order to understand what Christianity is in the present. They will identify the major events, 
personalities, and theological issues, both Western and non-Western, that shaped the development of 
Christianity. They will appreciate the challenges that the church faced as it matured in history, and they 
will gain perspective on the challenges still facing the church today. Prerequisite: BIB1050. This is an 
upper level course available to juniors and seniors. It is also offered at a graduate level. Three hours. 
 
BIB 3290 New Testament Exposition 
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and small group Bible 
study leadership. Observational skills of the English text of the New Testament will be developed 
through hands-on activities and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical 
genres with the goal to equip the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary 
context. Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. 
Prerequisites: BIB1050, BIB2010, and BBL2020. Three hours. 
 
BIB 3300 Essential Doctrinal Themes 
An overview of the essential doctrines every Christian should know and be able to articulate and defend. 
This course will focus on allowing students to engage in collaborative exercises to challenge their 
thinking and solidify their faith.  This course is required in the liberal arts core curriculum. Three hours. 
 
BIB 3310 Old Testament Exposition 
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and Bible study 
leadership. Observational skills of the English text of the Old Testament will be developed through 
hands-on activities and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical genres 
with the goal to equip the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary 
context. Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. 
Prerequisites: BIB1050 and BIB2010. Three hours. 
 
BIB 4060 Expository Preaching and Teaching 
This course combines both theory and practice. It introduces a functional methodology of organizing 
and developing the elements of a sermon. It examines issues of bridging exegesis and exposition as well 
as the application of biblical truth and the effective delivery to listeners. Approximately one-third of the 
course is devoted to a lab setting where lessons and sermons are video-recorded and critiqued. 
Prerequisites: COM1100, BIB1050 and BIB2010. Three hours. 
 
 
Educational Ministries 
BBL 2030 Foundations of Educational Ministry 
This course exposes students to learning theories and educational practices that can be applied to 
ministry settings. Learning theories help teachers understand how humans acquire new knowledge and 
embrace truth for transformational life change. This course will address not only inner processes that 
bring about growth, but also the environmental and social influences that can either promote or hinder 
wholistic learning that results in biblical wisdom. 
 
BBL 2040 Foundations of Ministry Leadership 
This course looks at the life of Jesus to learn from Him as the Master Teacher, Leader and Discipler. 
Students will explore Scripture and the lives of other godly men and women to gain a composite picture 
of leadership that addresses heart issues in the lives of people they will lead. Leadership from a biblical 
perspective will be countercultural and address issues of pride vs. humility, how we view failure/success 
and taking initiative in a Spirit-driven process. Students will have the opportunity for hands on 
integration of theory with practice as they process the course concepts in life with others in a relational 
context of ministry. 
BBL 2050  Relational Skills for Ministry 
 Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics and 
roles, and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 
in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development. Three units. 
 
See School of Behavioral Sciences, School of Education, and School of Arts & Sciences catalogs for 
additional course listings. 
 

 
Intercultural Studies and World Mission 
In the following courses, students will explore how culture affects communication, relationships, beliefs, 
value systems, and ministry. Students will gain a deeper understanding of world missions and the 
preparation essential for cross-cultural ministry. 
 
ICS 3110 Intercultural Communication 
Students will examine the principles and processes of communicating effectively with people from a 
second cultural context, whether in multi-cultural U.S.A. or in other countries. The course will 
investigate functional perception and how cultural worldview, beliefs, and values affect it through the 
personal perception of each individual. Students will explore how the shaping of the message, the style 
of communication, and the use of communication networks help to penetrate different cultures with 
the gospel. Dangers of ethnocentrism and its affect on the cross-cultural communication process will be 
discussed. The principles examined are valuable for intercultural relations in any field of work. 
Prerequisite: MIS2010. Three hours. 
 
ICS 3210 Applied Cultural Anthropology 
The nature of man and how his culture affects him are explored with a view to how this, in turn, affects 
ministry in intercultural contexts. Worldview assumptions and resulting values, beliefs, behavior, and 
attitudes are studied as to how they affect the person in his perception and understanding of the 
physical and spiritual world around him and, ultimately, his understanding of the Gospel. Social 
organization is examined as to how it affects ministry strategy, and the nature of culture change is 
investigated with a view to evangelism. Prerequisites: MIS2010. Three hours. 
 
ICS 3300 Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Eastern world are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism, Chinese Popular Religion (Taoism and Confucianism, with 
reflections of Taoism in Native American Religion), and Shintoism. These will be introduced with a short 
Theology of Religions.  Three hours. 
ICS 3350 Middle-Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Middle East are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Judaism, Islam, Baha’i, Zoroastrianism (Zarathustrism), and African Animism. These will be introduced 
with a short Theology of Religions and comments on why various religions have similarities with others.  
Three hours. 
MIS 2010 Introduction to World Missions 
This introductory course will help students discover basic understandings, motives, and methods for 
successful missionary work. Practical subjects such as good and bad reasons for going into missions, 
departure from and reentry into one’s own culture, entering a new culture, and choosing a mission field 
will be discussed. Basic skills for God’s work in another culture will be introduced. Theological and 

 
strategic foundations will provide a conceptual understructure for further studies in intercultural 
missions. Three hours. 
 
MIS 2080 Teamwork and Leadership Training in Missions 
Students will discover and carefully examine the biblical data on teamwork, emphasizing the New Testament 
material. From this examination, principles guiding biblical teamwork will be gleaned with primary emphasis 
on application to missionary teams today, especially those involved in church planting. Students will also 
discover biblical patterns and models of leadership training with a view to their practice today. Other 
practices of leadership training will be evaluated in light of this study. Attention will be given to the 
relationship between biblically sound leadership and team health and effectiveness. Prerequisites: MIS2010. 
Three hours. 
 
MIS 2100 History of World Missions 
In this course the backgrounds and development of the missions enterprise from the apostolic period 
until the present will be analyzed with a view to discovering the benefit to the intercultural task before 
us today. A proper understanding of the work of the Holy Spirit in this endeavor is emphasized. To give 
the student a good grasp of present-day major movements, significant current trends in missiological 
thought and practice will be examined. Prerequisites: MIS2010. Three hours. 
 
MIS 3220 Principles and Practice of Prayer 
Students will examine the teaching of the Scriptures on the subject of prayer with a view to discovering 
the absolute necessity of a vital prayer experience in the life of the man or woman of God and in the life 
of the Church. Urgency, consistency, and effectiveness of prayer will all be discussed as well as practical 
guidance for fostering these. Significant time will be spent in the practice of prayer. Three hours. 
 
MIS 4960 Cross Cultural Internship 
The Cross-Cultural Internship is for a minimum of 14 weeks (one semester) in a second culture. The 
internship itself is for six hours of academic credit. While in the host context the student will complete 
two campus courses (BBL3090 Spiritual Formation and MIS2100 History of World Missions) for three 
hours of credit each. These two courses will be taken by distance education with the supervision and 
grading of the professors on campus.  
 
The cross-cultural aspects of the internship are to be fulfilled under the direction of the faculty 
supervisor. The components that are requirements for the internship are a personal cultural identity 
exercise, a culture identity comparison exercise in the host culture, ministry and interaction experiences 
in the host context, (living with a host family in some contexts), a weekly journal, required reading, and 
a reflective term paper. 9  Credit hours. 
 
Languages, Biblical 
In the following courses, students will explore the meaning of the biblical text through a study of the original 
languages. The aim of the courses in Greek and Hebrew is to gain knowledge of grammar and vocabulary in order 
to do basic translation and exegesis of biblical passages. 
 
ENG 3300 Introduction to Linguistics 
A survey of the primary features of language, including phonology, morphology, semantics, language acquisition, 
how the brain processes language, and how languages change through contact with each other.  Students will 
learn the International Phonetics Alphabet and learn to transcribe the sounds of English and other world 

 
languages.  Students will work through morphological and semantic examples and exercises drawn from a 
worldwide sample of languages. 
 
GRE 1010-1020  New Testament Greek I and II  
This course introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Greek with emphasis on phonology, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will learn how to pronounce and read biblical Greek, 
the form and function of the noun and verb, the basic syntax of Greek words, phrases, and clauses. 
Three hours each session. 
 
GRE 2010 Greek Exegesis 
This course is a practical study of the procedures for doing sound exegesis in the various portions of the 
New Testament. The method will include the study of syntax, words, poetics, textual criticism, biblical 
theology, and practical exegetical exposition in the different genres of the Greek New Testament. The 
student will be introduced to the electronic tools available to aid in the preparation of sound, biblically-
based sermons/lessons. The course is designed to help the student prepare for the future use of the 
skills in the ministry of the Word. Prerequisites: GRE1010 and GRE1020. Three hours. 
 
GRE 2040 Greek Exegesis II 
An exegetical study of selected portions of the Greek New Testament in the original language designed 
to show its theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisites: GRE1010, GRE1020 and GRE2010. 
Three hours. 
 
HEB 1010–1030 Hebrew I, II and III 
In this two semester course students will seek to gain sufficient mastery of the Hebrew language, including 
vocabulary, forms, and syntax, in order to begin translating and interpreting the Hebrew Bible. The second 
semester is devoted mostly to reading Hebrew narrative, with a continuation of grammar studies inductively 
from the reading selections. Students will be introduced to the basic literary and electronic tools currently in 
use in Hebrew language studies. Prerequisites: none. Three hours each session. 
 
HEB 2020 Hebrew Exegesis I 
Students will seek to build on the foundation learned in the first two semesters of Hebrew and increase 
their knowledge of vocabulary, grammar, and syntax. Students will translate selections from the Old 
Testament, discovering translation techniques. Special focus will be placed on the theology and 
homiletical treatment of the book of Jonah. Prerequisites: HEB1010 and HEB1020. Three hours. 
 
HEB 2080 Hebrew Exegesis II 
Students will undertake critical and exegetical studies of portions of the Hebrew OT. By analyzing the 
major exegetical and theological problems against the historical background of the selected passages, 
students will discover theological, expository, and practical values of doing Hebrew exegesis. 
Prerequisites: HEB1010, HEB1020 and HEB2010. Three hours. 
 
LNG 4500 Articulatory Phonetics  
Students will introduce the student to the sounds used in spoken languages.  The student will be trained 
to recognize, produce, transcribe, classify and describe words.  The student will get intensive practice in 
using the full International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) for the whole range of sounds used in human 
speech. Two hours. 
 

 
LNG 4520 Syntax and Morphology 
Students will learn the fundamentals of analyzing the grammatical and morphological structures of 
languages.  The student will gain analytical skills developed through graded problems based on a wide 
variety of languages. Three hours. 
LNG 4700 Introduction to Sociolinguistics 
Introduction to language as a social phenomenon dependent on age, gender, social class, status, setting, 
and topic, with special attention to multilingual societies. Two hours. 
 
LNG 4800 Learner-Directed Second-Language Acquisition 
This course quips the student for success in learner-directed acquisition of language/culture without 
dependence on formal classroom instruction, especially in little-studied languages with few or no 
published pedagogical resources. The core of the course is an intensive language practicum (40-45 
hours), working with a native speaker of a language that is very different from languages the student 
already knows, in sessions led first by a teaching assistant and later by students. Separate lecture-
discussion sessions present the theoretical foundation for the practicum. An understanding of second 
language acquisition is instilled that combines Sociocultural Theory with the psycholinguistic study of 
comprehension and production along with a detailed multi-phase strategy for long-term 
language/culture learning. Three hours. 
Please note: LNG courses taken at Dallas International University through Summer Institute of 
Linguistics (Wycliff). 
 
Youth Ministry 
The Youth Ministries program is offered in cooperation with the National Institute for the Development 
of Ministries to Youth, founded by CE National. In addition to coursework, students must meet 
certification requirements, including hands-on experience in local and para-church ministry, youth 
ministry leadership, communication to youth, cross-cultural experience, and evangelism and 
discipleship. For more information, contact CE National. 
 
YMI 2140 Foundations and Philosophy of Youth Ministry 
Students will explore the modern history of youth ministry and will evaluate the four primary 
approaches in current use in light of biblical principles. Students will seek to understand contemporary 
adolescent issues and the essential ingredients needed to make an effective youth ministry. Students 
will develop strategies for integrating youth ministries into the local church. Areas of discussion will 
include parenting ministries and methods of building a volunteer staff and youth team.. Three hours. 
 
YMI 2240 Strategies for Church and Campus Youth Programming 
Strategies will be developed for establishing strong ministry teams and for ministering to junior and 
senior high students, as well as to recent graduates. Students will examine the role in youth ministries of 
the Christian school, home schooling, and the public school. They will explore and analyze various 
curriculums and develop strategies for meeting the needs of youth in complex family and societal 
structures. Prerequisite: YMI2140. Three hours. 
 
YMI 3140 Cross-Cultural Youth Ministries 
Students will learn to assess issues relevant to specific urban youth cultures and to target the needs of 
youth in various culturally diverse people groups. Students will develop strategies for meeting the needs 

 
of youth in cross-cultural contexts and for church planting with youth as the target. They will also 
investigate various methods of reaching preadolescent youth. Students will investigate how to train 
youth to take leadership in effective church planting and development. Three hours. 
 
YMI 3240 Counseling and Communicating with Contemporary Youth 
Students will seek to identify various methods of communicating biblical and spiritual truth to a 
changing youth culture. They will be equipped with techniques for establishing effective communication 
with young people. Various styles of communication, including small group discussions, informal 
teaching times, and the use of technology and music, will be examined. In addition, students will 
investigate counseling tools and techniques for working with families and youth in crisis counseling 
situations. Students will consider how to relate to the changing roles of adolescents as they mature in a 
diverse society. Legal issues of counseling will be examined, and students will evaluate how to 
determine the advisability of deferring troubled youth to professional counselors. Prerequisite YMI2140. 
Three hours. 
 
YMI 4100 Youth Ministry Internship 
In this 12-week internship, students gain hands-on experience working with youth in a supervised field 
experience at an approved site under a seasoned mentor. Students will learn how to program and 
develop leadership aspects of youth ministry in real life. Prerequisites: YMI2140, and YMI2240. Three 
hours. 
 
 
Philosophy 
The following courses are designed to acquaint students with the leading philosophical thought of the 
past and present. Students will explore the efforts of the human mind to understand such problems as 
the nature of the world and man, the question of right and wrong, and the quest for knowledge and 
truth—in light of various presuppositions and a distinctive Christian philosophy. 
 
 
PHI 3050 Apologetics  
The purpose of this course is to provide students with an introductory survey to the defense of the 
Christian worldview in its contemporary postmodern context. The course will cover areas such as: the 
biblical and theological justification for the apologetic task; issues surrounding apologetic methodology; 
strategies for effective presentation and argumentation; the development of a positive case for 
Christianity; common objections against the Christian worldview; and a critique of prevalent ideologies 
and worldviews. This course will address philosophical, historical, scientific, and cultural issues 
surrounding the defense of Christianity in the contemporary world. Three hours. 
 
PHI 3010 Christianity and Critical Thinking 
This course will critically examine the beliefs and presuppositions of philosophers and philosophies over 
the centuries and their impact on modern Christianity and the Christian Worldview.  A critical 
examination will begin by utilizing the lens of Scripture as the basis of truth in evaluating these beliefs.  
The application of that examination will be centered on the reasons for God as well as the nature of 
suffering and evil as learners are encouraged to formulate a biblically sound Christian Worldview.  This 
course is required in the liberal arts core curriculum. Prerequisites: BIB1050, and BIB2010.  Three hours.   
 
 

 
Sport Ministry  
BIB 2650 Introduction to Sport Ministry 
An introductory sport ministry course giving an overview of basic concepts, career preparation and 
professional opportunities within sports ministry.  The sports environment will be explored relating to 
the Scripture and ministry opportunities in sport.  Students will explore the many different types of 
sport ministry experiences available worldwide.  Three hours. 
 
See School of Business catalog for additional course listings. 
 
 
Master of Arts in Ministry Studies (online) 
 
NT 5320  New Testament Survey 
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, 
literary composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student 
should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of 
various concepts of the New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the 
purpose and general content of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New 
and Old Testaments, and the use of the New Testament in modern ministry. Three hours. 
MIN 5100 Bible Study Methods 
This course is designed to introduce learners to the basics of biblical interpretation and practical biblical 
inquiry.  This course will cover essential elements of Hermeneutics as well as give practical training in 
Bible study methodology focusing on the historical-grammatical interpretative method in the inductive 
Bible study format. Three hours.   
MIN 5310 Ministry & Cultural Diversity 
This course is intended to provide students with a basic understanding of the elements of culture and 
how they affect biblical ministry in intercultural and multicultural contexts. It is designed to help 
Christian workers become more effective in those contexts as their understanding permits them to 
shape their ministry to penetrate other cultures more deeply and, therefore, apply God‘s Word more 
accurately. Three hours. 
MIN 5320 Ministry Leadership 
Through the use of reading and writing assignments, online discussions, pastoral interviews, and a self-
assessment and action plan paper, the following leadership topics will be covered: servant leadership, 
mentoring, visionary leadership, and leading as a change agent. Eight weeks of course work will be 
conducted independently and on-line, culminating in a final paper. Three hours. 
MIN 6010 Spiritual Formation  
This course investigates the biblical and personal foundations of spiritual growth known theologically as 
sanctification. It is designed to help the learner understand the impact of family history, personal 
development and life experiences on one‘s theological outlook, emotional maturity, relational patterns, 
moral decisions and ministry effectiveness. Through personal prayer projects, experiential learning and 
small group interaction, learners will gain a richer sense of self-awareness in order to open more deeply 
to the love and truth of God. This integrative course attempts to connect theological truth to life in 

 
order to explore God‘s design for growth and how the individual might cooperate within the context of a 
developing relational Christian spirituality. Three hours. 
 
OT 5065 Old Testament Survey 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament. Three hours. 
PM 5160 Methods of Discipleship 
A biblical and theological study of Christian discipleship.  Includes insight, strategies, and methods 
ministers can use in the development of both personal and ministry-wide discipleship relationships and 
programing. Three hours.  
 
PM 6170 Ministry Administration  
A theological and practical analysis of administrative principles and processes as they apply to the 
effective leadership of church and parachurch agencies.  Special attention will be given to a balanced 
relationship between effective administrative functions and ministry. Three hours.  
 
PM 5570    Communication in Ministry 
This course examines the relevant application of communicating spiritual truth from the Word in a 
variety of ministry contexts. The course will focus on sermon preparation and delivery to various 
teaching environments that leaders will be engaged in to shape the life of a church and other ministry 
settings.  Three hours.   
 
PM 7120   Local Church Ministry in the 21st Century 
This course will seek to explore some underlying dynamics of local church life, along with some of the 
dominant ministry styles of contemporary North American churches, including both attractional and 
missional models. Focus will also include church assessment paradigms, a consideration of change 
strategies, and discussion of prevailing attitudes in our society toward the church. 
 
TH 5170   Theological Seminar 1  
This course is an introduction to theology and its sources. Foundations will be laid in the areas of 
prolegomena, Bibliology (The Bible), Theology Proper (God), Christology (Christ), Pneumatology (The 
Spirit), and Angelology (Angels including demons and Satan). MIN 5010. Three hours.  
 
TH 5180   Theological Seminar 2  
This course is designed to introduce learners to theology and its sources. Foundations will be laid in the 
areas of systematic theology dealing with Anthropology (the nature of man), Hamartiology (sin), 
Soteriology (salvation), Ecclesiology (the Church), and Eschatology (future events). MIN 5020. Three 
hours  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Women’s Leadership 
MIN 5110 Equipping Other for Ministry 
Equipping others for ministry is a part of our calling from God (Eph. 4:11-13). But how do we work with 
others so that we reach maturity together? This course will help you see that ministry is not just about 
doing the ministry yourself, but teaching others to join you in various arenas of ministry. You will learn 
about God’s equipping ministry in your own life, and be challenged to imitate His methods of entrusting 
others with redemptive work through His Spirit. The class will explore various methods of equipping 
others, including mentoring, coaching and modeling, and will address the challenges of recruiting, 
training and retaining volunteers or key staff members. Three hours.   
 
MIN 5360 Women in Scripture 
Students will explore the value of women as disclosed in special revelation, beginning with Genesis and 
the “imago dei”. They will research the backdrop of the ancient world in order to understand the various 
roles women played in the OT in revealing the heart of God and His plan for redemptive history. They 
will investigate ways that Jesus elevated the status of women and how NT passages describe the 
function of women within the Christian community. Using modern theories on the role of women—
complementarian and egalitarian—students will seek to define a biblical approach to contemporary 
questions about the role of women. In addition, students will analyze current culture and make 
recommendations for how God’s Word speaks into the lives of women today. Three hours.  
 
MIN 5600 Biblical Foundations of Leadership 
This course looks at the life of Jesus to learn from Him as the Master Teacher, Leader and Discipler. 
Students will explore Scripture and the lives of other godly men and women to gain a composite picture 
of leadership that addresses heart issues in the lives of people they will lead. Leadership from a biblical 
perspective will be countercultural and address issues of pride vs. humility, how we view failure/success 
and taking initiative in a Spirit-driven process. Students will have the opportunity for hands on 
integration of theory with practice as they process the course concepts in life with others in a relational 
context of ministry.  Three hours.   
 
MIN 5820 Soul Care in Leadership 
This class will examine how to journey with others in the midst of their questions and pain. Instead of 
trying to fix others in pain, soul care attempts to incarnate the presence of God in the life of another and 
allow God to use you to be his hands and feet. Part of this process is learning how to listen to the Spirit 
of God and attend to another in the midst of their journey. The learner will have the opportunity to see 
and reject patterns of self-talk (based on the flesh) in order to embrace Spirit-led patterns of soul talk. 
The care of souls is an interpersonal part of ministry leadership that often gets overlooked in our 
program-driven church context. This class will help to equip ministry leaders in their role as shepherd to 
the flock entrusted to their care.  Three hours.   
 
 
Counseling  
 
MIN 5500 Counseling Theories 
In this course, students will examine today’s predominant counseling theories in order to develop their 
own biblical framework in which they will provide counsel to others. The focus of the course is to help 
discern God’s pathway to proper biblical counseling. Three hours. 

 
MIN 5700 Counseling Methods and Techniques 
This course will examine the various skills, methods and techniques used by a Christian or Pastoral 
Counselor to effectively minister to those being counseled. An aspect of the course is how to use the 
Bible and prayer in counseling, and direction on when to refer to other professionals. Three hours. 
MIN 5900 Pre-Marital and Marital Counseling 
This course will examine how to effectively engage in pre-marital counseling to help couples prepare for 
marriage and to help couples who are struggling in their marriage. Various theories, skills and 
techniques of marriage counseling will be discussed. Three hours. 
MIN 6200 Counseling Common Problems 
This course will examine how to counsel people who encounter negative emotions such as anxiety, 
depression, guilt and fear and help navigate these issues from a biblical perspective. The focus will be on 
how God can help people deal with the emotional side of their lives by looking at Scripture and allowing 
God to move them into places of spiritual transformation. Three hours. 
PM 6160 Biblical Psychology 
This course will examine the relationship between the fields of psychology and theology. A theology of 
“integration” will be presented, along with discussions concerning specific “psychological” topics (i.e. 
personality, sensation/perception, self-esteem, etc.) from a biblical vantage point. A biblical discussion 
of depression and anxiety will be an aspect of this course, along with how one would use this material to 
counsel/minister to others.  Three hours.  
 
PM 6060 Legal and Ethical Issues in Pastoral Counseling 
This course is designed to develop a broad biblical knowledge base, critical thinking and ethical decision-
making skills for pastoral counselors. A focus will be given to a high standard of personal and 
professional ethics to enhance pastoral counseling that is above reproach. Three hours. Three hours. 
 
 
Technology 
 
PM 5180 Technology & Media in Ministry 
This course addresses the everchanging media technology challenges that ministries face today. This 
course identifies the ever changing and complex landscape of media technology in a media-centric 
society and how ministries can use modern media effectively to communicate the life-changing message 
of Jesus Christ. 
 
PM 5190 Worship Arts 
This course is designed to address corporate worship within the context of media   technology. This 
course acknowledges the need for technology to accomplish tasks as well as produce creative media rich 
environments for worship experiences. 
 
PM 6070 Creative Communication Strategies 
 A comprehensive approach to building mission-driven and culturally-sensitive ministry 
communications.  Involves integration of traditional, social, and digital media for providing relevant 
information, inspiration, instruction, marketing, and promotion to ministry stakeholders. 
 
 

 
PM 6180 Organizational Tools 
A comprehensive sweep of organizational and educational technology for more efficient ministry and 
effective teaching in 21st Century ministry.  Includes identification of ministry-related categories in 
which technology may be useful, in addition to investigating specific tools (software, hardware, services) 
that can meet practical ministry needs. 
 
PM 6240 Developing Tech Talent 
An overview of the biblical importance of equipping and its relationship to ministry teams in the local 
church.  Special attention given to identifying, cultivating, training, and deploying skilled teams of tech 
leaders for ministry. 
 
PM 6840  Tech Ministry Internship 
The practical application and integration of technology tools within a ministry setting.  Includes some 
topically-guided course content, in addition to a required practical internship and application 
hours.  This internship may be a paid or volunteer role, and involves direct interaction with an onsite-or-
off-ministry-site technology-ministry specialist or media minister. 
 
 
MIN 5010 Theological Seminar 1  
An introduction to theology and its sources. Foundations will be laid in the areas of prolegomena, 
Bibliology, Theology Proper, Christology, Pneumatology, and Angelology. Three hours.  
 
MIN 5020 Theological Seminar 2 
An introduction to theology and its sources. Foundations will be laid in the areas of: Anthropology, 
Hamartiology, Soteriology, Ecclesiology, and Eschatology. Three hours. 
MIN 5100 Bible Study Methods 
This course is designed to introduce learners to the basics of biblical interpretation and practical biblical 
inquiry.  This course will cover essential elements of Hermeneutics as well as give practical training in 
Bible study methodology focusing on the historical-grammatical interpretative method in the inductive 
Bible study format. Three hours. 
MIN 5200 Old Testament Survey 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament. Three hours. 
MIN 5210 New Testament Survey 
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, 
literary composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student 
should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of 
various concepts of the New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the 
purpose and general content of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New 
and Old Testaments, and the use of the New Testament in modern ministry. Three hours. 
MIN 5310 Ministry & Cultural Diversity 
This course is intended to provide students with a basic understanding of the elements of culture and 
how they affect biblical ministry in intercultural and multicultural contexts. It is designed to help 
Christian workers become more effective in those contexts as their understanding permits them to 
shape their ministry to penetrate other cultures more deeply and, therefore, apply God‘s Word more 
accurately. Three hours. 
 

MIN 5320 Ministry Leadership 
Through the use of reading and writing assignments, online discussions, pastoral interviews, and a self-
assessment and action plan paper, the following leadership topics will be covered: servant leadership, 
mentoring, visionary leadership, and leading as a change agent. Eight weeks of course work will be 
conducted independently and on-line, culminating in a final paper. Three hours. 
MIN 5340 Ministry Preaching and Teaching 
This course combines both theory and practice. It introduces a functional methodology of organizing 
and developing the elements of a sermon. It examines issues of bridging exegesis and exposition as well 
as the application of biblical truth and the effective delivery to listeners. Approximately one-third of the 
course is devoted to a lab setting where lessons and sermons are videotaped and critiqued. Three hours. 
MIN 6010 Spiritual Formation  
This course investigates the biblical and personal foundations of spiritual growth known theologically as 
sanctification. It is designed to help the learner understand the impact of family history, personal 
development and life experiences on one‘s theological outlook, emotional maturity, relational patterns, 
moral decisions and ministry effectiveness. Through personal prayer projects, experiential learning and 
small group interaction, learners will gain a richer sense of self-awareness in order to open more deeply 
to the love and truth of God. This integrative course attempts to connect theological truth to life in 
order to explore God‘s design for growth and how the individual might cooperate within the context of a 
developing relational Christian spirituality. Three hours. 

MIN 5110 Equipping other for ministry: 
Equipping others for ministry is a part of our calling from God (Eph. 4:11-13). But how do we work with 
others so that we reach maturity together? This course will help you see that ministry is not just about 
doing the ministry yourself, but teaching others to join you in various arenas of ministry. You will learn 
about God’s equipping ministry in your own life, and be challenged to imitate His methods of entrusting 
others with redemptive work through His Spirit. The class will explore various methods of equipping 
others, including mentoring, coaching and modeling, and will address the challenges of recruiting, 
training and retaining volunteers or key staff members. Three hours. 
 
MIN 5360 Women in Scripture 
Students will explore the value of women as disclosed in special revelation, beginning with Genesis and 
the “imago dei”. They will research the backdrop of the ancient world in order to understand the various 
roles women played in the OT in revealing the heart of God and His plan for redemptive history. They 
will investigate ways that Jesus elevated the status of women and how NT passages describe the 
function of women within the Christian community. Using modern theories on the role of women—
complementarian and egalitarian—students will seek to define a biblical approach to contemporary 
questions about the role of women. In addition, students will analyze current culture and make 
recommendations for how God’s Word speaks into the lives of women today. Three hours. 
 
MIN 5820 Soul Care in Leadership: 
This class will examine how to journey with others in the midst of their questions and pain. Instead of 
trying to fix others in pain, soul care attempts to incarnate the presence of God in the life of another and 
allow God to use you to be his hands and feet. Part of this process is learning how to listen to the Spirit 
of God and attend to another in the midst of their journey. The learner will have the opportunity to see 
and reject patterns of self-talk (based on the flesh) in order to embrace Spirit-led patters of soul talk. 
The care of souls is an interpersonal part of ministry leadership that often gets overlooked in our 
program-driven church context. This class will help to equip ministry leaders in their role as shepherd to 
the flock entrusted to their care.     
 
MIN 5600 Biblical Foundations of Leadership: 
This course looks at the life of Jesus to learn from Him as the Master Teacher, Leader and Discipler. 
Students will explore Scripture and the lives of other godly men and women to gain a composite picture 
of leadership that addresses heart issues in the lives of people they will lead. Leadership from a biblical 
perspective will be countercultural and address issues of pride vs. humility, how we view failure/success 
and taking initiative in a Spirit-driven process. Students will have the opportunity for hands on 
integration of theory with practice as they process the course concepts in life with others in a relational 
context of ministry. 
 
Counseling  
 
MIN 5500 Counseling Theories 
In this course, students will examine today’s predominant counseling theories in order to develop their 
own biblical framework in which they will provide counsel to others. The focus of the course is to help 
discern God’s pathway to proper biblical counseling. Three hours. 

MIN 5700 Counseling Methods and Techniques 
This course will examine the various skills, methods and techniques used by a Christian or Pastoral 
Counselor to effectively minister to those being counseled. An aspect of the course is how to use the 
Bible and prayer in counseling, and direction on when to refer to other professionals. Three hours. 
MIN 5900 Pre-Marital and Marital Counseling 
This course will examine how to effectively engage in pre-marital counseling to help couples prepare for 
marriage and to help couples who are struggling in their marriage. Various theories, skills and 
techniques of marriage counseling will be discussed. Three hours. 
MIN 6200 Counseling Common Problems 
This course will examine how to counsel people who encounter negative emotions such as anxiety, 
depression, guilt and fear and help navigate these issues from a biblical perspective. The focus will be on 
how God can help people deal with the emotional side of their lives by looking at Scripture and allowing 
God to move them into places of spiritual transformation. Three hours. 
PM 6160 Biblical Psychology 
This course will examine the relationship between the fields of psychology and theology. A theology of 
“integration” will be presented, along with discussions concerning specific “psychological” topics (i.e. 
personality, sensation/perception, self-esteem, etc.) from a biblical vantage point. A biblical discussion 
of depression and anxiety will be an aspect of this course, along with how one would use this material to 
counsel/minister to others.  Three hours.  
PM 6060 Legal and Ethical Issues in Pastoral Counseling 
This course is designed to develop a broad biblical knowledge base, critical thinking and ethical decision-
making skills for pastoral counselors. A focus will be given to a high standard of personal and 
professional ethics to enhance pastoral counseling that is above reproach. Three hours. Three hours. 
Technology 
 
PM 5180 Technology & Media in Ministry 
This course addresses the everchanging media technology challenges that ministries face 
today. This course identifies the ever changing and complex landscape of media technology in a media-
centric society and how ministries can use modern media effectively to communicate the life-changing 
message of Jesus Christ. Three hours. 
 
PM 5190 Worship Arts 
This course is designed to address corporate worship within the context of media   technology. This 
course acknowledges the need for technology to accomplish tasks as well as produce creative media rich 
environments for worship experiences. Three hours. 
 
PM 6070 Creative Communication Strategies 
A comprehensive approach to building mission-driven and culturally-sensitive ministry 
communications.  Involves integration of traditional, social, and digital media for providing 
relevant information, inspiration, instruction, marketing, and promotion to ministry stakeholders. Three 
hours. 
 
 

PM 6180 Organizational Tools 
A comprehensive sweep of organizational and educational technology for more efficient ministry and 
effective teaching in 21st Century ministry.  Includes identification of ministry-related categories in 
which technology may be useful, in addition to investigating specific tools (software, hardware, services) 
that can meet practical ministry needs. Three hours. 
 
PM 6240 Developing Tech Talent 
An overview of the biblical importance of equipping and its relationship to ministry teams in the 
local church.  Special attention given to identifying, cultivating, training, and deploying skilled 
teams of tech leaders for ministry. Three hours. 
 
PM 6840 Tech Ministry Internship 
The practical application and integration of technology tools within a ministry setting.  Includes 
some topically-guided course content, in addition to a required practical internship and 
application hours.  This internship may be a paid or volunteer role, and involves direct 
interaction with an onsite-or-off-ministry-site technology-ministry specialist or media minister. Three 
hours. 
 
Leadership and Management 
 
PM 7010 Ministry Leadership 
Ministry Leadership Through the use of reading and writing assignments, online discussions, pastoral 
interviews, and a self-assessment and action plan paper, the following leadership topics will be covered: 
servant leadership, mentoring, visionary leadership, and leading as a change agent. Eight weeks of 
course work will be conducted independently and on-line, culminating in a final paper. Three hours. 
 
PM 6170 Ministry Administration 
A theological and practical analysis of administrative principles as they apply to the effective leadership 
of church and parachurch agencies. Special attention will be given to a balanced relationship between 
effective administrative functions and ministry. Three hours. 
 
PM 5070 Equipping other for ministry 
 Equipping others for ministry is a part of our calling from God (Eph. 4:11-13). But how do we work with 
others so that we reach maturity together? This course will help you see that ministry is not just about 
doing the ministry yourself, but teaching others to join you in various arenas of ministry. You will learn 
about God’s equipping ministry in your own life, and be challenged to imitate His methods of entrusting 
others with redemptive work through His Spirit. The class will explore various methods of equipping 
others, including mentoring, coaching and modeling, and will address the challenges of recruiting, 
training and retaining volunteers or key staff members. Three hours. 
 
PM 5040 Interpersonal Communication and Conflict Management 
 Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics, and 
roles and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 

in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development. Three hours. 
 
PM 6560 Team Leadership 
The student will study the biblical principles that mandate teamwork within organizational structures. 
Group formation and group development will be analyzed, as well as the intricacies of coaching and 
mentoring to identify team effectiveness that establishes organizational community. Three hours. 
 
PM 6570 Strategic Thinking and Planning 
An in-depth study of how ministry leaders can become strategic thinkers and use creative and 
systematic processes. The focus will be on developing the practices of strategic planning for ministry 
effectiveness by using key concepts, tools, and principles of strategy formation. Three credit hours.  
 
TH 6910–6930 Independent Study in Theology 
From one to three credit hours may be earned for guided independent study. A focused area of study 
within the disciplines of this department is chosen with the approval of a faculty member. Generally, a 
reading report and a fully documented research paper will be the final result. All proposals must be 
submitted in writing to the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary after approval has been obtained 
from the department. One to three hours. 
TH 7100 Advanced Systematic Theology 
Building on a foundation of basic orthodox systematic theology, students will explore the issues that 
create tensions within a theological system. Particular attention will be focused on contemporary 
theological questions relating to topics such as inspiration, the nature of God, personal eschatology, etc. 
Students will be expected to prepare position papers, which are to be defended in class. Prerequisites: 
TH 505 and TH 506 or their equivalents. Three hours. 
Old Testament Studies 
Since the Old Testament, like the New, is divinely inspired, it must be given serious attention as an 
indispensable source for doctrine, correction, and spiritual growth. Its narratives provide hundreds of 
examples of God’s dealings with humankind, and by this we gain important insights into the heart of 
God and His expectations for His people. Its poetry exhibits the joys and agonies of those who pursued 
godliness, and its prophecies reveal God’s concern for Israel in ancient times as well as the future. The 
Old Testament is critical to the work of the pastor or Christian leader in preaching, teaching, discipling, 
counseling, and dealing with the challenges of administration. 
The seminary, therefore, requires all M.Div. candidates to acquire the ability to translate the Hebrew 
text of the Old Testament, to gain some practical work in the field of scientific exegesis, and to study the 
methods and results of biblical archaeology, literary criticism, and ancient near eastern backgrounds. 
The ultimate goal of these disciplines is not for mere intellectual entertainment, but to enable the 
student to present the theological, historical, and practical truths of the Old Testament through 
expository preaching and teaching. 
OT 5065 Old Testament Survey - Course offered online only 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament. Three hours. 
 
OT 5000 Old Testament Introduction 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament.  Three hours.  
 

OT 6010 Old Testament Theology 
An overview of the content, history, and theology of the Old Testament as it serves as a foundation for 
understanding the New Testament, for the church and the Christian life. Special attention is given to the 
development of Old Testament theology and major Old Testament themes. Students with no prior 
background in Old Testament studies may be required to complete assignments that will provide a 
survey of the Old Testament. Three hours.  MIN 5205, BIB 4215. 
OT 6040 Biblical Hebrew I 
This course introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Hebrew with emphasis on phonology, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will learn how to pronounce and read biblical Hebrew, 
the form and function of the noun and verb, the basic syntax of Hebrew words, phrases, and clauses.  
Three hours. 
OT 6050 Biblical Hebrew II 
This course further considers elements of Hebrew grammar at the beginning level with a focus on the 
regular verb, vocabulary, and intermediate syntax. The student will build on the foundation laid in OT 
604, Biblical Hebrew I. Prerequisite: OT 6040. Three hours. 
OT 6060 Biblical Hebrew III 
This course further considers Hebrew grammar and vocabulary at the intermediate level with a focus on the 
remaining stems and the Hebrew weak verb. Designed to prepare the advancing Hebrew student for 
exegetical study by a detailed consideration of Hebrew syntax and the reading and translating of selected 
texts. Prerequisite: OT 6050. Three hours. 
OT 6910–6930 Independent Study in Old Testament 
From one to three credit hours may be earned for guided independent study. A focused area of study within 
the disciplines of this department is chosen with the approval of a faculty member. Generally, a reading 
report and a fully documented research paper will be the final result. All proposals must be submitted in 
writing to the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary after approval has been obtained from the 
department. One to three hours. 
OT 7020 Old Testament Research Project  
Careful exegetical research into an issue or problem relating to the Old Testament text or its 
interpretation or application. The research is to be written up in a 25 page formal paper. For topic 
approval and writing guidelines, the student must contact the chair of the Department of Old Testament 
Studies. Three hours. 
OT 7040 Hebrew Exegesis I 
This course is a practical study of the procedures for doing sound exegesis in the various portions of the 
Old Testament. The method will include the study of syntax, words, poetics, textual criticism, biblical 
theology, and practical exegetical exposition in the different genres of the Hebrew Bible. The student 
will be introduced to the electronic tools available to aid in the preparation of sound, biblically-based 
sermons/lessons. The course is designed to help the student prepare for the future use of the skills in 
the ministry of the Word. Prerequisite: OT 6050. Three hours. 
OT 7050 Hebrew Exegesis II 
An exegetical study of selected portions of the Hebrew Old Testament in the original language designed 
to show its theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: OT 7040. Three hours. 

OT 7420 Advanced Hebrew Exegesis 
Further exegetical study of selected portions of the Hebrew Old Testament including wisdom literature 
and poetry, designed to show their theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: OT 7050. 
Three hours. 
OT 7510–7530 Independent Study in Hebrew 
Three hours of credit may be earned for guided independent study in Hebrew. The course must be 
approved in writing by an Old Testament professor and the Dean of the Seminary. Prerequisite: OT 
7050. Three hours. 
New Testament Studies 
The purpose of the Department of New Testament is to equip students to work in the Greek New 
Testament—exegetically and theologically—in order that they might accurately interpret and apply the 
New Testament. Special emphasis is devoted to developing proficiency in the art of exegesis. Students 
receive instruction in Culture, Literature and History of the NT World, New Testament Greek grammar 
and syntax, textual criticism and literary analysis, resolving historical/grammatical/ lexical/theological 
issues, and biblical theology, all of which enables students to move from exegesis to biblical exposition 
and culturally relevant application. 
GRE 1010 New Testament Greek I 
This course introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Greek with emphasis on phonology, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will learn how to pronounce and read biblical Greek, 
the forms and functions of the various parts of speech, and the basic syntax of Greek words, phrases, 
and clauses. Zero hours. 
GRE 1020 New Testament Greek II 
This course further introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Greek with emphasis on 
phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will grow in the ability to pronounce and 
read biblical Greek, the forms and functions of the various parts of speech, and the basic syntax of Greek 
words, phrases, and clauses Students will also begin study of Greek grammar and vocabulary at the 
intermediate level. It is designed to prepare the advancing Greek student for exegetical study by a 
detailed consideration of Greek syntax and the reading and translating of selected texts. Prerequisite: 
GRE 1010. Zero hours. 
NT 5320 New Testament Survey - Course offered online only 
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, 
literary composition, theology and message.  After successfully completing this course, the student 
should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of 
various concepts of the New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the 
purpose and general content of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New 
and Old Testaments, and the use of the New Testament in modern ministry. MIN 5210. Three hours. 
 
NT 6020–6040 Independent Study in Greek 
This course is a guided independent study in biblical Greek. The course must be approved in writing by a 
New Testament professor and the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary. Prerequisite: NT705. One to 
three hours. 

NT 6810–6830 Independent Study in New Testament 
Independent studies are designed for advanced New Testament Greek students who wish to do 
independent research on some aspect of New Testament studies not treated in other courses. 
Evaluations are based upon reading reports and a fully documented research project proportionate to 
the number of credit hours desired to be earned. One to three credit hours may be earned in any one 
subject of study. All proposals must be submitted in writing to the Vice President and Dean of the 
Seminary after approval has been obtained from the chair of the Department of New Testament Studies. 
Prerequisite: NT 7040 or equivalent. One to three hours. 
NT 7020 New Testament Research Project 
Careful exegetical research into an issue or problem relating to the New Testament text or its 
interpretation and application. The research is to be articulated in a major research paper (length 
determined by the professor). For topic approval and writing guidelines, the student must contact the 
Professor of New Testament Studies. Three hours. 
NT 7040 Greek Exegesis I1 
This course is a practical study of the procedures for doing sound exegesis in the various portions of the 
New Testament. The method will include the study of syntax, words, poetics, textual criticism, biblical 
theology, and practical exegetical exposition in the different genres of the Greek New Testament. The 
student will be introduced to the electronic tools available to aid in the preparation of sound, biblically-
based sermons/lessons. The course is designed to help the student prepare for the future use of the 
skills in the ministry of the Word. Prerequisite: GRE 1020. Three hours. 
NT 7050 Greek Exegesis II 
An exegetical study of selected portions of the Greek New Testament in the original language designed 
to show its theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: NT7040. Three hours. 
NT 7420 Advanced Greek Exegesis 
This course examines further the exegetical study of selected portions of the Greek New Testament (as 
determined by the professor), designed to show their theological, expository, and practical values. 
Prerequisite: NT7050. Three hours. 

PM-5160 Discipleship Methods
A biblical and theological study of Christian discipleship. Includes insight, strategies, and methods 
ministers can use in the development of both personal and ministry-wide discipleship relationships and 
programing. Three hours.
 

PM 5040 Interpersonal Communication and Conflict Management 
Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics, and 
roles and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 
in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development. MIN 5005. Three hours. 
 
PM 5080 Pastoral Ministry Skills 
A biblical, theological, and practical consideration of the pastor’s call, character, and ministry 
responsibilities. Instruction will focus on pastoral skill development in areas such as leadership, public 
speaking, worship service coordination, pastoral care, disciple-making, administering the ordinances, 
and conducting weddings and funerals.  
 
PM 5560 Exegetical Resources and Tools 
This course provides the student with the knowledge and skills necessary for the accurate studying and 
applying of Scripture as a key to their vocational ministry. In this course the student will be introduced 
to the necessary tools, both online and printed, as well as various methods and tools necessary for a 
comprehensive and faithful study of Scripture. 
 
PM 6010 Spiritual Formation 
This course investigates the biblical and personal foundations of spiritual growth known theologically as 
sanctification. It is designed to help the learner understand the impact of family history, personal 
development and life experiences on one’s theological outlook, emotional maturity, relational patterns, 
moral decisions and ministry effectiveness. Through personal prayer projects, experiential learning and 
small group interaction, learners will gain a richer sense of self-awareness in order to open more deeply 
to the love and truth of God. This integrative course attempts to connect theological truth to life in 
order to explore God’s design for growth and how the individual might cooperate within the context of a 
developing relational Christian spirituality. MIN 6010. Three hours. 
PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching 
This course is designed to provide instruction and experience in the process of communicating God’s 
truth to people through the avenues commonly referred to as “teaching” and “preaching”. It introduces 
a functional methodology of organizing and developing the components of sermons, and examines 
issues related to the bridging of exegesis and exposition. It also explores some of the elements of how to 
“connect” with contemporary audiences and maintain their attention. Learning will be accomplished 
through (a) classroom instruction, dialogue, and group activities and (b) a preaching/teaching lab 
experience. This lab experience is intended to provide an environment where the student may gain 
benevolent feedback while perfecting skills in the oral presentation of biblical truth. Prerequisite: 
TH5090. Three hours. 
 
PM 6220 Advanced Preaching Seminar 
This is a 3 credit hour course that is dedicated to building upon the instruction and experience gained 

through PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching (which is a prerequisite).  It will address an array of 
sermonic issues—content, form, delivery—and especially will seek to identify ways of handling different 
biblical genres and different sermon focuses (e.g., evangelistic, doctrinal, etc.). The course will also 
encourage experience in creative methodologies of preaching, methodologies designed to impact 21st 
century listeners. Prerequisite: PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching. MIN 5345. Three hours. 
 
PM 6340 Ministry Preaching & Teaching 
This course is designed to provide instruction and experience in the process of communicating God’s 
truth to people.  It introduces methodology of organizing and developing the components of sermons 
and examines issues related to the bridging of exegesis and exposition.  It also explores some of the 
elements of how to “connect” with contemporary audiences and maintain their attention.  Learning will 
be accomplished through digesting class lectures, reading textbooks, discussion of teaching, 
methodology, constructing and delivering sermons, processing the feedback of others and engaging in 
self-assessment. MIN 5340. Three hours. 
 
PM 6460 Ministry Philosophy for the Church – Course offered online only 
This course seeks to promote appropriate ministry perspectives especially as applied to the local church 
in North America. Two main areas will receive attention: 1) the attitudes and responsibilities of a servant 
leader of the local church, and 2) a philosophy of local church ministry. In addition, a variety of specific 
applications of New Testament ecclesiology are discussed and applied to contemporary life and ministry. 
MIN 5350. Three hours. 
 
PM 6600 Principles & Practice of Prayer 
This course will take an in-depth look at prayer as God’s means of leading and strengthening faithful 
servants for His work among Christians and non-Christians of this age. Christian ministry depends on an 
intimate walk with God for stability and ongoing effectiveness of the ministerial servant, for spiritual 
formation in the lives of those to whom we minister, and for the strategic planning necessary for 
effective missional ministry. Not only will the theology and instructions about prayer be examined, but it 
will be practiced in meaningful ways throughout the seminar. (PG) PM 8250, MI 6600, MIN 6600. Three 
hours. 
PM 6910–6940 Independent Study in Pastoral Ministries 
A limited number of credit hours (a maximum of four) may be given for independent study done outside 
the context of a classroom course. Special outside seminars with additional reading and reporting as 
assigned by the supervising professor can be used in this regard. One to four hours. 
PM 7000 Leadership in the Local Church 
Through the use of reading and writing assignments, pastoral interviews, and a self-assessment and 
action plan paper, the following leadership topics will be covered: servant leadership, mentoring, 
visionary leadership, and leading as a change agent.  Three hours. 
PM 7010 Ministry Leadership 
This course is designed to strengthen leadership skills for ministry.  A study and interaction with these 
topics will implement that purpose: servant leadership, mentoring, visionary leadership, and leading as a 
change agent.  The methods will include reading and writing assignments, online discussions, pastoral 
interviews, a self-assessment and an action plan paper. The course work will be conducted 
independently, culminating in final papers.  The prof will address the topic of the week.  MIN 5320. 
Three hours. 
 

PM 7120 Local Church Ministry in the 21st-Century 
This course will seek to explore some underlying dynamics of local church life, along with some of the 
dominant ministry styles of contemporary North American churches, including both attractional and 
missional models. Focus will also include church assessment paradigms, a consideration of change 
strategies, and discussion of prevailing attitudes in our society toward the church.  A substantial 
component of the course will include involvement in an off-campus experience designed to expose the 
student to urban ministries.  Three hours. 
PM 7325 Practical Ministry Apprenticeship: Evangelism, Discipleship, and Missions 
The apprenticeship is designed to foster growth in the student’s readiness for leadership and servant 
ministry in a local church, ministry organization or mission.  The apprentice will work under the 
mentorship of an experienced ministry professional who, in cooperation with Grace Seminary, will give 
assignments, evaluate the student’s fulfillment of assignments and meet regularly with the apprentice. 
The student will provide to Grace Seminary evidence of having accomplished a specific number of 
competencies, the number depending on the credit hours being granted for the apprenticeship.  The 
student will be required to complete a small amount of academic work (books read, papers written, 
etc.), the amount to be commensurate with the credit hours being granted for the apprenticeship.   
Three hours. 
PM 7610–7630 Degree Project 
By means of this special course, the student will complete work designed to inaugurate or substantially 
revise an area of ministry in which he or she is personally interested. A prospectus must be submitted to 
the project coordinator prior to the beginning of the semester during which the project will be studied 
and completed. It must provide the information required in the “Guidelines for Degree Projects” 
available from the seminary professors of pastoral ministry. One to three hours. 
  
Women’s Leadership Studies 
PM 5040 Interpersonal Communication and Conflict Management 
Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics, and 
roles and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 
in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development.  
MIN 5005. Three hours. 
 
 
PM 5070 Equipping Others for Ministry 
This course will help you see that ministry is not just about doing the ministry yourself, but teaching 
others to join you in various arenas of ministry.  You will learn about God’s equipping ministry in your 
own life, and be challenged to imitate His methods of entrusting others with redemptive work through 
His Spirit.  The class will explore various methods of equipping others, including mentoring, coaching and 
modeling, and will address the challenges of recruiting, training and retaining volunteers or key staff 
members. MIN 5110. Three hours. 

 
MI 5250   Understanding and Engaging Culture  
This course examines culture.  It explores the roots of culture as a foundational and overarching 
expression of humanities vocations as “imaging” of God in Scripture. The subsequent harmonies and 
dissonances between historical expressions of culture and Christianity are analyzed and discussed.  Also, 
contemporary expressions of popular digital culture, film, video and music, will be selectively surveyed 
with an eye to developing the capacity to constructively and critically engage culture as 
Christians.  Three hours 
 
PM 5340 Women in Scripture 
Students will explore the various roles women played in the OT against the backdrop of the ancient 
world. They will investigate ways that Jesus elevated the status of women and how NT passages 
describe the function of women within the Christian community. Using modern theories on the role of 
women—hierarchical, complementarian, and egalitarian—students will seek to define a biblical 
approach to contemporary questions about the role of women. MIN 5360. Three hours. 
PM 5550 Biblical Foundations of Leadership 
This course looks at the life of Jesus to learn from Him as the Master Teacher, Leader and Discipler.  
Students will explore Scripture and the lives of other godly men and women to gain a composite picture 
of leadership that addresses heart issues in the lives of people they will lead.  Leadership from a biblical 
perspective will be countercultural and address issues of pride vs. humility, how we view failure/success 
and taking initiative in a Spirit-driven process.  Students will have the opportunity for hands on 
integration of theory with practice as they process the course concepts in life with others in a relational 
context of ministry. MIN 5600. Three hours. 
 
PM 5730 Soul Care in Leadership 
This class will examine how to journey with others in the midst of their questions and pain. Instead of 
trying to fix others in pain, soul care attempts to incarnate the presence of God in the life of another and 
allow God to use you to be his hands and feet. Part of this process is learning how to listen to the Spirit 
of God and attend to another in the midst of their journey. The learner will have the opportunity to see 
and reject patterns of self-talk (based on the flesh) in order to embrace Spirit-led patters of soul talk. 
The care of souls is an interpersonal part of ministry leadership that often gets overlooked in our 
program-driven church context. This class will help to equip ministry leaders in their role as shepherd to 
the flock entrusted to their care. MIN 5820. Three hours. 
  
Pastoral Counseling Studies 
PM 5330 Counseling Theories 
In this course, students will examine today’s predominant counseling theories in order to develop their 
own biblical framework in which they will provide counsel to others. The focus of the course is to help 
discern God’s pathway to proper biblical counseling. MIN 5500. Three hours. 
PM 5520 Counseling Methods and Techniques 
This course will examine the various skills, methods and techniques used by a Christian or Pastoral 
Counselor to effectively minister to those being counseled. An aspect of the course is how to use the 
Bible and prayer in counseling, and direction on when to refer to other professionals.  MIN 5700.       
Three hours.  
 

PM 5800 Pre-Marital and Marital Counseling 
This course will examine how to effectively engage in pre-marital counseling to help couples prepare for 
marriage and to help couples who are struggling in their marriage. Various theories, skills and 
techniques of marriage counseling will be discussed. MIN 5900. Three hours. 
PM 6160 Biblical Psychology 
This course will examine the relationship between the fields of psychology and theology. A theology of 
“integration” will be presented, along with discussions concerning specific “psychological” topics (i.e. 
personality, sensation/perception, self-esteem, etc.) from a biblical vantage point. A biblical discussion 
of depression and anxiety will be an aspect of this course, along with how one would use this material to 
counsel/minister to others. Three hours. 
Intercultural Studies and World Missions 
The Department of Intercultural Studies and World Mission is aimed at instilling in the heart of every 
student, a world vision and a passion for reaching that world. The curriculum is prepared to meet the 
needs of both experienced missionaries desiring graduate study as well as eager recruits preparing for 
cross-cultural ministry. Four things characterize this program: vision for global ministry, prayer and the 
recognition of dependence on God’s strength, skill development for effective intercultural ministry, and 
teamwork to multiply spiritual energies. 
MI 5010 Biblical Theology of Missions 
A course on the biblical basis and theological framework for world mission showing how that endeavor 
is the purpose of God as he reaches out to his creation. God is a missional God and all theology has a 
missional purpose since it concerns the God of mission and the mission of God. The course develops the 
concepts of how theological categories are inherently missiological and missiological categories 
intensely theological. DI 8530, MIN 6100.  Three hours. 
  
MI 5120 Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Eastern world are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism, Chinese Popular Religion (Taoism and Confucianism, with 
reflections of Taoism in Native American Religion), and Shintoism. These will be introduced with a short 
Theology of Religions.  Three hours. 
MI 5130 Middle-Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Middle East are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Judaism, Islam, Baha’i, Zoroastrianism (Zarathustrism), and African Animism. These will be introduced 
with a short Theology of Religions and comments on why various religions have similarities with others.  
Three hours. 

MI 5250   Understanding and Engaging Culture 
This course examines culture.  It explores the roots of culture as a foundational and overarching 
expression of humanities vocations as “imaging” of God in Scripture. The subsequent harmonies and 
dissonances between historical expressions of culture and Christianity are analyzed and discussed.  Also, 
contemporary expressions of popular digital culture, film, video and music, will be selectively surveyed 
with an eye to developing the capacity to constructively and critically engage culture as 
Christians.  Three hours 
 
MI 5300 Encountering Islam 
This course will cover the origins of Islam as well as its beliefs and practices from both the Qur’an and 
the Hadith literature and traditions. The life of Muhammad and the Qur’an itself will be studied from the 
standpoint of original Muslim sources. Faith and practice in modern-day Islam in its various forms, 
Islam’s response to Christianity, and Christianity’s response to Islam will be explored. Students will 
research and present findings on issues in Islam. Practical ways to reach out to Muslims will be 
discussed. DI 8200, IM 8300. Three hours. 
MI 5540 Ministry & Cultural Diversity 
The goals for this course are (1) to give Christian ministry students as awareness of the nature of cultural 
systems and how they affect ministry in multi-cultural settings and (2) to give them insights, methods, 
and skills for adapting their perspective and activities for a relevant ministry to those of other cultural 
backgrounds. MIN 5310. Three hours. 
 
MI 6030 Intercultural Communication 
A study of the principles and processes of communicating effectively with people from a second cultural 
context. The course focuses on functional perception and how cultural worldview, beliefs, and values 
affect that through the personal perception of each individual. The shaping of the message, style of 
communication, and communication networks for each cultural context are explored with a view to 
penetrating each culture as deeply as possible with the Gospel. The dangers of ethnocentrism and some 
current methods of contextualization are discussed. PM 5490, PM 8620, DI 8030, IM 8620, MIN 6400.  
Three hours. 
MI 6060 Applied Cultural Anthropology 
The nature of man and how his culture affects him are explored with a view to how this, in turn, affects 
ministry in intercultural contexts. Worldview assumptions and resulting values, beliefs, behavior, and 
attitudes are studied as to how they affect the person in his perception and understanding of the 
physical and spiritual world around him and, ultimately, his understanding of the Gospel. Social 
organization is examined as to how it affects ministry strategy and the nature of culture change is 
investigated with a view to evangelism. MIN 6300. Three hours. 
MI 6080 Teamwork and Leadership Training in Missions 
The student will study the biblical principles that mandate teamwork in the world mission task 
concentrating on the unity of the Godhead as the ultimate model for all unified human relationships. 
Attention is given to God’s model of reproducing reproducers as His intended normative approach to 
leadership. The transcultural application of the relationship of Father, Son and Holy Spirit will be 
carefully studied.  Three hours. 
MI 6090 Principles of Contextualization 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 

context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture. The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in Bible interpretation and the importance of taking into consideration 
the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. Emphasis is 
given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text was written. 
Prerequisite: MI 6060. Three hours. DI 8040. 
 
MI 6600 Principles and Practice of Prayer 
This course will take an in-depth look at prayer as God’s means of leading and strengthening faithful 
servants for His life and ministry. A large section at the outset of the course is dedicated to studying the 
prayer life and prayer teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. Additionally, significant questions and issues 
about prayer are given careful study. Students are expected to establish a prayer partnership during the 
class to apply what they are learning. PM 6600, PM 8250, MIN 6600. Three hours.  
MI 7160–7190 Missiological Research 
Missiological research is in-depth study in an area in the field of missiology. It is reserved for upper-level 
students upon approval of the department chairman and is pursued under his supervision. A research 
paper, accounting of time, and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required. Prerequisite: 
MI 606. One to four hours. 
MI 7210–7230 Readings in World Religions and Ideologies 
This is a guided independent study course designed to give the student an overall knowledge of the 
religious contexts of the world that the Gospel must penetrate. As a major part of most cultural 
worldviews, religions, and religious themes will be studied by the student in detail with a view to their 
function in the society where they are found. Students will search for bridges for communication of the 
true Gospel in each religious context. Attention will be given to Animism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, 
and their variant forms, as well as many smaller religious systems. One to three hours. 
MI 7290 Intercultural Apprenticeship  
The Intercultural Apprenticeship is a guided experience and study program in a cross-cultural setting. It 
involves a culture discovery program for gaining insights into the target culture and understanding the 
people in their actual situation. It provides exposure to the culture in various areas and experience in 
various levels of evangelism, discipleship, and church development within this new environment giving 
the student practical, intercultural encounters for the exercise of the student‘s theoretical learning. 
Students also take a distance education course in mission history while in the cross-cultural context and 
can become a part of the ongoing history in that particular country.  Prerequisites: MI 6060 and MI 
6030. Six hours. 
 
MI 7300 Cross-Cultural Internship/Apprenticeship   
Achieving competence in a second culture can only come about if intercultural training is combined with 
experience in that culture that is concerned with discovery of the cultural system and building 
relationships of trust. It is the goal of the Cross-Cultural Internship to provide that experience and 
practice. The concepts covered in the courses of Applied Cultural Anthropology and Intercultural 
Communication will become operational in the actual context of the new culture providing for 
intentional adaptation. Complete culture discovery guidelines are provided and put into practice under 
the oversight of an experienced mentor in that cross-cultural context. Twelve hours. 
 
MI 7920–7940 Cross-Cultural Internship 
The mission internship is a guided experience and study program in a cross-cultural setting. It involves a 
culture discovery program for gaining insights into the target culture and understanding the people in 

their actual situation. It provides experience in various levels of evangelism, discipleship, and church 
development within this new environment giving the student practical, intercultural encounters for the 
exercise of the student’s theoretical learning. Prerequisite: MI 606. Two to four hours. 
 
Deploy Course Descriptions 
Note: DGM (MDiv) and DLC (MALCM) – Credits are credit equivalencies 
 
DGM 5050 | DLC 5050 Orientation and Student Success 
Students will be competent to enter the Deploy program, demonstrating understanding of its 
distinctives, tuition and billing, financial aid, student support services, academic policies, and enrollment 
and withdrawal information. Students will be competent to use key website throughout their Deploy 
program, including the Learning Management System (Canvas), the Portal, and Nelnet. Students will also 
demonstrate an ability to succeed in Deploy by doing reliable research and writing at a graduate level. 
Students will demonstrate this by knowledge and practice of: 1) proper format (Turabian), 2) guidelines 
to proper citation methods (preventing plagiarism), 3) grammatical structure and syntax, 4) 
compositional skills (thesis statement, topic sentence, providing evidence for claims, persuasion, clear 
structure, introduction and conclusion), 5) acquiring information from appropriate academic resources 
(e.g. scholarship: peer reviewed, edited/published materials). Zero hour prerequisite course.   
DGM 5100-5103 | DLC 5100-5103 Embracing Sanctification 
Students will be competent to understand and cooperate with God in the sanctification process. In order 
to be competent in this process, the student will grow in acquiring double knowledge: knowledge of God 
and knowledge of self. This knowledge deals with the root of heart issues out of which flow either the 
fruit of righteousness (leading to life) or the fruit of unrighteousness (leading to death). The biblical 
mandate to put off the old man and put on the new man is fundamentally a matter of the heart, not of 
behavioral modification. Therefore, signs of growth include 1) rejecting lies, which includes brokenness 
and repentance over sin, while, 2) embracing the truth of one’s life in Christ, lived out through pursuing 
transformation of the mind through the hungry intake of the Truth. The mind set on the Spirit will 
produce the fruit of the Spirit. The student will also need to understand the common stages related to 
spiritual formation and be able to identify key markers in each phase of the journey, including God’s use 
of consolation and desolation to promote growth. The spiritual disciplines become tools to open oneself 
to God; and in the process, what’s in one’s heart will be revealed. Competence in double knowledge 
recognizes that spiritual disciplines enable a person to humbly position themselves to hear God speak 
and to invite Him to do His transforming work. Practicing the spiritual disciplines requires significant 
effort, but as Dallas Willard says, God is opposed to earning, not effort. What happens in the disciplines 
such as solitude, reading God’s word, praying (including intercession, petitions, listening, and worship), 
or fasting only have value in as much as they foster an intimate and dependent relationship with God. 
Three hours.  
*DGM 5200-5202 | DLC 5200-5202 Thinking Critically in Ministry was previously offered but has been 
removed from the program. It’s learning outcomes have been reallocated into modules within DGM/DLC 
5800 and 5900. MA students will take DLC 5904 and 5905 in lieu of DLC 5200-5202, or be permitted to 
seek course substitution to fulfill their degree requirements. MDiv students are not permitted to seek 
course substitution to fulfill their degree requirements in light of the MDiv program’s overall reduction 
from 90 to 75cr. 

DGM 5300-5303 | DLC 5300-5303 Becoming a Mature Disciple 
Students will be competent in the process of becoming a mature disciple who is loving God and loving 
others. Students will learn to relate to God in a healthy manner. This involves a fully devoted heart that 
embraces Christ as King, where the pilgrim gives Him full authority and allows Him to prioritize his/her 
value system. In order to relate to God in this way, the mature disciple will grow in understanding the 
role of the human heart, the complexity of this biblical concept, and the realities of how the heart is 
shaped. The problem with a sinful heart is that it desires self and sin rather than God and His way. Even 
as a Christian, one needs to be aware of the sinful tendencies that are still at work in the redeemed 
heart, so that the life of Christ may be fully appropriated. Three hours.  
*DGM 5400-5202 | DLC 5400-5202 Research and Writing was previously offered but has been removed 
from the program. It’s learning outcomes have been reallocated into modules within DGM/DLC 5800 
and 5900. MA students will take DLC 5804 in lieu of DLC 5400-5402, or be permitted to seek course 
substitution to fulfill their degree requirements. MDiv students are not permitted to seek course 
substitution to fulfill their degree requirements in light of the MDiv program’s overall reduction from 90 
to 75cr. 
 
DGM 5500-5503 | DLC 5500-5503 Practicing Biblical Hermeneutics 
Students will be competent to understand and apply hermeneutics. The student will be competent to 
demonstrate a basic understanding of the history and contemporary practice of biblical interpretation 
and its foundational principles and tools while maintaining a commitment to the reliability of the Bible 
as demonstrated by its authority, inerrancy, and inspiration. Students will apply these principles and 
tools to their own personal study and application of Scripture and in ministry related projects to improve 
the student’s ability to prepare and deliver hermeneutically sound preaching and teaching materials in 
their ministry context. Three hours. 
DGM 5600-5603 | DLC 5600-5603 Understanding Biblically Healthy Churches 
Learners will be competent to understand and articulate the nature of biblically healthy churches. The 
student will need to be able to translate the nature of biblically healthy churches into their current social 
context; and be able to implement strategies to establish healthy churches in different contexts. Those 
strategies must include viable approaches to the teaching of God’s word, corporate worship, evangelism 
(same culture and cross culture), discipleship and multiplying leaders. Three hours. 
DGM 5700-5703 | DLC 5700-5703 Exercising Flexibility in Ministry 
Learners will be proficient to exercise appropriate flexibility. The student will become aware of personal 
preferences and learn to deal with them in a way which avoids the tendency toward legalism, and 
instead, demonstrates grace-filled respect; discerns the difference between flexibility and people 
pleasing; and distinguish the difference between conviction driven leadership and high control-low 
trust-driven leadership. In addition, in the spirit of the Apostle Paul’s words, “I have become all things to 
all men that I might save some,” the student will develop a growing level of cultural flexibility which 
flows from a knowledge of and respect for diverse cultures through an exposure to different people 
groups. Three hours. 
DGM 5800-5812 | DLC 5800-5804 Applying Biblical Exegesis 
Students will be competent in Biblical Exegesis. The student will be competent to use an exegetical 
method to accurately interpret genre, language, and literary structures to understand the 
redemptive/historical/sociocultural context of the Bible, and do proper theological analysis while using 
the best available resources. MDiv: Twelve hours. MA: Four hours. 

DGM 5900-5906 | DLC 5900-5905 Articulating Biblical Theology 
Students will be competent to articulate and apply Biblical Theology. The student will be competent to 
describe and articulate the history, methodology, and content of Biblical Theology. Special attention is 
given to the progressive revelation and development of Scripture’s main storyline, key themes, 
continuity and discontinuity between the Old and New Testaments, and a gospel-centered, Christ-
focused, canonically-sensitive approach to reading and interpreting the Bible as they relate to one’s 
personal life, the lives of Christians, and local ministry context. MDiv: Six hours. MA: Five hours. 
DGM 6000-6015 Utilizing Biblical Languages 
Students will be competent to apply the basics of phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary of 
biblical Greek and Hebrew to their study of Scripture. This competency will cover the essentials of 
Biblical Greek and Hebrew with an emphasis on phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The 
purpose is to understand Biblical Greek and Hebrew for the purpose of translating and doing exegesis in 
the Hebrew Old Testament and Greek New Testament. MDiv Only: Fifteen hours. 
 
DGM 6100-6106 Applying Foundational Doctrines 
The student will be competent to evaluate, synthesize, articulate, and apply foundational doctrines in 
the different areas of Systematic Theology including: Bibliology, Theology Proper, Christology, 
Pneumatology, Angelology, Anthropology, Hamartiology, Soteriology, Ecclesiology, and Eschatology as 
they relate to one’s personal life, the lives of Christians, and the local ministry context. MDiv Only: Six 
hours.  
DGM 6200-6203 Understanding the Development of Doctrine 
Students will be competent to understand and articulate an overview of the development of doctrine in 
the church. The student will be competent to understand the development of doctrine in the church 
from the Apostolic Fathers through the 21st century.  This includes church confessions, major 
theological movements and controversies, and important theologians.  The student will demonstrate 
the ability to apply insights gleaned from historical theology to one’s own Christian life, local ministry 
context, and current challenges for theology and the Church. MDiv Only: Three hours.  
DGM 6300-6303 | DLC 6000-6003 Embodying the Love of God 
Students will be competent to show love and compassion to others. Those who are learning 
competence to show love and compassion have experienced the initiating love of God at an in-depth 
level for themselves. Relating to others in love requires discerning and demonstrating appropriate ways 
to nurture growth in the life of another. They are committed to becoming an exceptional listener by 
soliciting feedback from others as they develop empathy. They exercise the freedom to both nurture 
and confront, to rescue and release, and to discern when to reach out and when to wait. They are not 
motivated by a Messiah complex [unrealistic valuation of their own importance and ability to save 
people, but are compelled by love (2 Cor. 5:4)]. They are developing boundary-setting habits in order to 
prioritize loving their family, while showing compassion to those within and outside the church. They 
learn from those who have established a track record of loving “hard to love people” within their sphere 
of influence. They follow the example of Christ whose rhythm of life included loving extravagantly and 
being replenished deeply through intimate times with His Heavenly Father and selected disciples. They 
seek out authentic friendship and spiritual community for mutual encouragement. Three hours.  
DGM 6400-6403 | DLC 6100-6103 Embracing Cultural Diversity 
Students will be competent to understand cultural diversity. The student will understand cultural 
diversity as a learner who observes, listens, reads, and carefully studies his/her audience. Able to discern 
the difference between cultural absolutes and biblical absolutes. Appreciative of how culture affects our 
understanding and application of the biblical text in our own and other cultures. Translates 

understanding of cultural diversity into appropriate and culturally relevant, biblical ministry within 
diverse contexts. Three hours.  
DGM 6500-6503 | DLC 6200-6203 Articulating Personal Theology 
Students will be competent to articulate their own theology in light of their denominational/church 
affiliation. Students will understand and be able to articulate and explain their own theological 
convictions as they relate to their denominational or church affiliation, and complete the necessary 
preparations for ordination, or as if they were pursuing ordination. Three hours.  
DGM 6600-6603 | DLC 6300-6303 Resolving Leadership Conflict 
Learners will become competent to grasp and adapt to leadership pressures, conflict, and criticisms that 
are inherent in transformational ministry. This competency requires a leader to understand personal 
leadership tendencies due to family background and other personal influences (people and 
experiences), taking steps toward building on the strengths and being released from unhealthy patterns. 
A leader is fundamentally a Christ follower, who is teachable and solicits wisdom from relevant 
resources. This type of leader is learning to avoid the tendency to discount one’s own voice, giftedness 
and Spirit-led convictions. Doing so, prevents pitfalls such as plagiarizing sermons, idolizing Christian 
celebrities, and attempting to clone successful programs without discernment. A growing leader learns 
to manage his/her own life by exercising self-control that intentionally pursues whatever is pure, true, 
noble, right, lovely and admirable and avoids compromising situations. Competent leaders learn to face 
and process criticism and conflict in redemptive ways. Three hours.  
DGM 6700-6703 | DLC 6400-6403 Communicating God’s Truth 
Students will be competent to communicate God’s truth in diverse contexts and by various methods 
based on a thorough understanding of the content, intent, and structure of the biblical text. Mastery of 
this competency leads to a clear, authoritative, and contextual delivery of the biblical message. This 
encompasses an accurate knowledge of the audience. This also includes the integration of biblical truth 
into the life of the speaker. Learners who master this competency will be able to teach others to do 
likewise. Three hours. 
DGM 6800-6803 | DLC 6500-6503 Initiating Transformational Change 
Students will be competent to be a change agent who leads churches (or ministries) to become or 
remain biblically healthy by articulating Christ-centered values and vision, developing strategies that 
unify churches around these values and vision, and initiating transformational rather than merely 
transactional change. Three hours.  
 
Doctor of Ministry  
 
DI 8030 Intercultural Communication  
A basic understanding of this foundational element in all intercultural ministries is developed in the class 
and in assigned reading. Communication itself is discussed in its various facets, and then each facet is 
considered as to how it creates meaning in other cultures for real communication. Social, cultural, 
linguistic, and psychological barriers to good communication in a second culture are considered. Other 
areas covered are intercultural education and leadership training. Three hours.  
 
DI 8140 Cultural Anthropology for Ministry 
This course provides basic understandings in cultural anthropology for effective cross-cultural and 
multicultural ministries. It shows the importance of knowing anthropological concepts to gain and 
maintain that effectiveness and gives the student an understanding of culture with its behavior, values, 

beliefs, and the assumptions that lie behind them. Among other concepts, the course covers social 
systems, role and status, rites of passage, enculturation, acculturation, and culture shock. Also discussed 
are cultural values on time, thinking, decision-making, morality, individualism, conflict, logic, and 
ambiguity. It deals with the complexities of culture change and how worldview affects that change. 
Students will discover many of their own cultural values through the course, an essential element in 
understanding and working with a second culture. Three hours. 
DI 8150 Contextualization for Ministry 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 
context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture.  The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in biblical interpretation and the importance of taking into 
consideration the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. 
Consideration is given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text 
was written. This course also prepares pastors for multicultural situations in preaching and teaching 
ministries. MI 6090. Three hours. 
 
DI 8160 Church Planting and Growth 
An intensive study of the biblical definition of a local church and how that becomes the goal in 
church planting. New Testament early church forms and methods of expansion are 
investigated. An examination of the spiritual foundation and the principles and methods of 
evangelism and discipleship is undertaken with a special emphasis given to the training of 
nationals and the transfer of leadership to them. 
 
 
DI 8280 Doctoral Research Methods 
Essential techniques of qualitative and quantitative research are taught and practiced. The appropriate 
uses of social research are explored through research reports and case studies. Students use practice 
exercises to demonstrate their ability to conduct research, interpret the results, and apply findings to 
practical situation in ministry settings. Three hours. 
 
DI 8520 World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions are studied with a view to understanding why the 
tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. How each religion affects the host culture and 
how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The inadequacies of each belief system will be 
discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, thus, an introductory understanding of biblical 
theology is assumed.   Three hours. 
IM 8150 Mission Strategy 
This course will provide examples of the application of strategic planning from the New Testament, in 
particular from the ministry of the apostle Paul.  Throughout the course we will attempt to keep our 
focus on the supreme purpose of human history, the calling out and perfecting of the Bride of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.  A clear vision of the glory of the Church is our main asset for effective ministry. MI 6140. 
Three hours. 
 
IM 8300 Encountering Islam 
This course is intended to give the student an understanding of the true nature of the religion of Islam.  
It has become the second most influential religion in the world, next to Christianity itself.  In our day 

Islam has taken on the reputation of a terrorist organization that is only a short way from holding the 
world hostage to its demands.  How much is true?  Where does this emphasis come from?  What does 
Islam say about itself?  And what should our response be?  DI 8200, MI 5300. Three hours. 
 
IM 8960 Research in Intercultural Ministry 
Students in the D.Min. program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
intercultural situation. A research paper including related ministry materials will be the final product of 
the study. Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of 
the D.Min. program. Three hours. 
PM 8010 Practice of Ministry Leadership 
A study of the biblical and theological concepts of ministry of leadership. Special emphasis upon an 
analysis of administrative and leadership functions and the practical implementation of management 
principles, the development of leaders and team-building in the local church. Three hours.  
 
PM 8100 The Effective Communicator 
The goal of the course is to increase a speaker’s ability to develop messages which are: True to the 
biblical text; Clear and well-organized; Interesting to listen to; Specifically relevant to the listener’s 
needs. Students will learn (a) how to determine the specific applications of a biblical passage and (b) 
how to help listeners follow the unfolding of the message. These practical skills will be developed 
through instruction, examples, group interaction and personal use. PM 7130. Three hours. 
 
PM 8130 Old Testament Preaching and Teaching 
This course focuses on some of the basic themes of the Old Testament and how to present them 
powerfully from the pulpit or in teaching situations. Appropriate hermeneutical strategies will be 
applied to different genres of the Old Testament. Attention will also be given to the application of these 
truths to personal spiritual growth. Specific Old Testament problems will be analyzed and discussion will 
be centered on how to use these problems positively in ministry. This is a practical course that deals 
with the tools and concepts that help preachers prepare sermons. OT 7000. Three hours. 
 
PM 8260 Current Theological Issues 
This seminar coordinates study and discussion of current theological issues and trends that are 
impacting the church. Special attention is given to the application of these issues and trends to real life 
settings. This course is team taught.  
Theology.  TH 7101. Three hours. 
 
PM 8370 Change and Conflict Management 
An examination of advantages and disadvantages of pastoring an established church; how to assess and 
implement changes for continuing progress in growth and ministry. Special focus on how to rally support 
from other leadership and then the church people. Three hours. 
  
PM 8410 High Impact Expository Preaching Method  
A study of the High-Impact Expository Preaching (HIEP) Method.  Attention will be focused on 
developing a deep understanding of the impact of anointed expository preaching using a Bible-centric, 
skill-based, and outcome driven method. Three hours. 
 
PM 8420 High Impact Expository Preaching Lab  
A practical preaching lab requiring a step-by-step application and mastery of the High-Impact Expository 
Preaching (HIEP) Method.  Learners will demonstrate growing expertise in Bible-centric, outcome-driven 

preaching in both the individual aspects of the HIEP method, in addition to expository preaching as a 
whole. Three hours. 
 
PM 8430 High Impact Expository Exegesis  
An exegetical approach in which students will learn to accurately mine the biblical text for the sermon’s 
central proposition as well as the subsequent outline and content, using the High Impact Expository 
Preaching (HIEP) Method. Three hours. 
 
PM 8440 Multi-Sensory Preaching 
An application of current educational psychology and brain research in the field of homiletics.  Involves 
the recognition and engagement of listeners’ senses in the congregational preaching context to drive life 
transformation through engaging learners’ attention, comprehension, retention, and application of 
God’s Word. Three hours. 
 
PM 8510 Foundations for Ministry 
Required of all D.Min. students, this course is designed to prompt students to rethink the foundational 
values that drive them and to gain personal feedback from those closest to them. The instructors will 
seek to help participants reflect upon needs for personal growth and ministry skill development, as well 
as issues for appropriate theological investigation and cultural relevancy. Opportunities will be given to 
assess strengths and weaknesses, including the use of testing tools and the development of a plan for 
enhancing areas of potential growth. (PG) PM 7311. Three hours. 
PM 8530 Strengthening Spiritual Vitality 
God’s grace is expressed not only in salvation but also in the Christian life-in forgiving, accepting, 
enabling, sustaining, equipping and empowering the believer. This course examines the true meaning of 
grace, the need for grace (even for believers), the effectiveness of grace in developing Christ-like 
character and the relationship of God’s grace and the believer’s practice of spiritual disciplines in 
Christian growth. Subjects to be covered include: living by grace, preaching grace-based messages, 
creating a grace environment in the local church, understanding grace as a motivation for both 
sanctification and Christian service, and the importance of the practice of spiritual disciplines.  PM 6530. 
Three hours. 
 
PM 8610 Pastoral Counseling 
This course considers various needs that occur in the context of pastoral ministry and offers insights to 
understand the complexity of people's emotional and spiritual problems in the church. The 
psychological approaches with Biblical and theological perspectives provide effective solutions for those 
people in need. 
 
PM 8630 Leadership and Growth Pipeline  
A biblical and organizational analysis of the leadership and growth needs of ministries, resulting in the 
development of a discipleship-based strategy for sustainable outreach, evangelism, catechesis, 
assimilation, formation, and leadership production, as evidenced by demonstrable numerical growth. 
Three hours. 
 
PM 8670 Team Staffing, Mentoring, and Coaching  
A biblical and theological overview of ministry leadership as it pertains to coordinating the work of the 
ministry through volunteer and paid ministry staff.  Special attention given to providing advanced 
strategic equipping in hiring, positioning, equipping, overseeing, mentoring, and coaching ministry 
professionals. Three hours. 

 
PM 8830 Advanced Shepherding  
An advanced biblical, theological, and practical consideration of the pastor’s role and responsibilities as 
the shepherd of God’s flock. Special focus on effective pastoral care including disciple making strategy, 
conflict resolution, ministry to the suffering and grieving, interpersonal relationship skills, spiritual 
formation in small groups, and pastoral counseling. Three hours. 
 
PM 8840 Ministry Vision and Strategy  
A theological overview of management and leadership principles involved in the identification and 
execution of a God-given ministry vision and strategy.  Includes attention to identifying the knowledge, 
skill sets, tools, and competencies required for effective visioneering, vision-casting, and strategic 
planning required to move an organization to mission-vision-goal fulfillment. (3 hours)    
 
PM 8850 Ministry Alignment and Execution  
A theological analysis of biblical and organizational principles effective in the planning, organization, 
resourcing, and execution of ministry goals.  Special emphasis to be given on expertly motivating and 
mobilizing a well-organized and empowered team of highly-equipped people to reach the multifaceted 
goals of a church or Christian ministry. Three hours. 
 
PM 8950 Research in Pastoral Ministry 
Students in the D.Min. program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
pastoral situation. A research paper including related ministry materials will be the final product of the 
study. Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of the 
D.Min. program. Three hours. 
PM 8990 Doctor of Ministry Professional Project–All Concentrations 
D.Min. candidates must successfully complete a major ministry project at the conclusion of their course 
work. This project should involve an actual ministry situation or program need and incorporate 
significant theological and theoretical research. A project report of 125–200 pages must be submitted. 
For deadlines, consult the Doctor of Ministry Handbook. Six hours. 
 
Doctor of Intercultural Studies  
DI 8030 Intercultural Communication  
A basic understanding of this foundational element in all intercultural ministries is developed in the class 
and in assigned reading. Communication itself is discussed in its various facets, and then each facet is 
considered as to how it creates meaning in other cultures for real communication. Social, cultural, 
linguistic, and psychological barriers to good communication in a second culture are considered. Other 
areas covered are intercultural education and leadership training. IM 8620, MI 6030, MIN 6400, PM 
5490, PM 8620. Three hours.  
 
DI 8080 Modern Trends in Global Mission (Online Seminar) 
This course examines recent developments in Christian mission against a four-fold backdrop. First, God’s 
divine governance of his world is a foundational reality to be acknowledged. Second, under God’s 
ultimate reign the world changes, as do its various contexts. Third, God specially directs and empowers 
his redemptive mission throughout the earth. Fourth, historically Christian mission efforts have arisen 
within settings determined by the three facets just listed. Modern mission trends can thus best be 

examined by keeping in view this four-fold backdrop of God’s governance, changing world contexts, 
Spirit-led mission, and mission history. MI 6210. Three hours.   
 
DI 8140 Cultural Anthropology for Ministry 
This course provides basic understandings in cultural anthropology for effective cross-cultural and 
multicultural ministries. It shows the importance of knowing anthropological concepts to gain and 
maintain that effectiveness and gives the student an understanding of culture with its behavior, values, 
beliefs, and the assumptions that lie behind them. Among other concepts, the course covers social 
systems, role and status, rites of passage, enculturation, acculturation, and culture shock. Also discussed 
are cultural values on time, thinking, decision-making, morality, individualism, conflict, logic, and 
ambiguity. It deals with the complexities of culture change and how worldview affects that change. 
Students will discover many of their own cultural values through the course, an essential element in 
understanding and working with a second culture. PM 8810, IM 8810, MI 6410. Three hours. 
DI 8150 Contextualization for Meaningful Ministry 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 
context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture.  The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in biblical interpretation and the importance of taking into 
consideration the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. 
Consideration is given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text 
was written. This course also prepares pastors for multicultural situations in preaching and teaching 
ministries. MI 6090. Three hours 
 
DI 8160 Church Planting and Growth 
An intensive study of the biblical definition of a local church and how that becomes the goal in church 
planting. New Testament early church forms and methods of expansion are investigated. An 
examination of the spiritual foundation and the principles and methods of evangelism and discipleship is 
undertaken with a special emphasis given to the training of nationals and the transfer of leadership to 
them. 
 
DI 8180 Cross-Cultural Leadership Development 
Students who complete this course should be able to: (1)evaluate the models demonstrated and 
teaching given on leadership development in the Old and New Testaments, including the concept of 
servant leadership, (2)distinguish the cultural factors that impact on the development of effective 
Christian leaders in a specific culture, (3)compare and contrast different cultural leadership styles and 
development processes, and (4)design a leadership development process appropriate to a specific 
culture. Three hours. 
 
DI 8240 Directed Research and Writing (Online Seminar) 
Learners will engage in exploration of potential supporting themes related to their future dissertation 
topic. This involves designing a detailed topic-driven outline, then conducting a targeted research 
project under the direction of a DICS faculty member. The online class research project will involve the 
identification and use of quality digital, print, and other research, resulting in a comprehensive 
annotated bibliography, then a formal precedent literature draft paper. Three hours 
 

DI 8280 Doctoral Research Methods 
Essential techniques of qualitative and quantitative research are taught and practiced.  The appropriate 
uses of social research are explored through research reports and case studies.  Students use practice 
exercises to demonstrate their ability to conduct research, interpret the results, and apply findings to 
practical situations in ministry settings. MI 6200. Three hours. 
 
DI 8520 World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions are studied with a view to understanding why the 
tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. How each religion affects the host culture and 
how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The inadequacies of each belief system will be 
discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, thus, an introductory understanding of biblical 
theology is assumed.  IM 7020, MI 6420. Three hours. 
 DI 8530 Biblical Theology of World Mission 
A course on the biblical basis and theological framework for world mission showing how that endeavor 
is the purpose of God as he reaches out to his creation. God is a missional God and all theology has a 
missional purpose since it concerns the God of mission and the mission of God. The course develops the 
concepts of how theological categories are inherently missiological and missiological categories 
intensely theological. The missio Dei is scrutinized in terms of the nature, goal, story, and methods of 
that mission. Three hours. 
 
DI 8580 World Religions in Mission 
This course provides a clear introduction to the major world religions, examining their religious 
traditions of the world in light of their history, worldview, practices, places, philosophies, and ideals. 
These include the Primitive religions, Zoroastrianism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Cheondoism, 
Shintoism, Confucianism, and Daoism. In addition, by identifying these major religions of the world, this 
course challenges students to familiarize themselves with these religions and contextualize efficiently 
within the diversity of religiosity for a more effective mission. Three hours. 
 
DI 8980 Professional Research Project: Intercultural Studies  
DICS candidates must successfully complete a major research project at the conclusion of their course 
work. This project should involve the research of an actual intercultural ministry situation problem, 
program need, or missiological question and incorporate significant theological and missiological, 
theoretical research. The proposal for the research will be approved by the advising faculty.  A 
dissertation of 225–250 pages must be submitted. For details and deadlines, consult the Doctor of 
Intercultural Studies Handbook. Eight hours. 
PM 8260 Current Theological Issues 
This seminar coordinates study and discussion of current theological issues and trends that are 
impacting the church. Special attention is given to the application of these issues and trends to real life 
settings. This course is team taught. TH 7101. Three hours. 
PM 8610 Pastoral Counseling 
This course considers various needs that occur in the context of pastoral ministry and offers insights to 
understand the complexity of people's emotional and spiritual problems in the church. The 
psychological approaches with Biblical and theological perspectives provide effective solutions for those 
people in need. 
 
 

ELECTIVES 
 
DI 8060 Cross-Cultural Education  
An emphasis is put on educational principles and then relates them to teaching and learning styles of 
other cultures.  Traditional learning styles will be explored for other cultures with a view to the best 
formal, informal, and non-formal methodologies that might be applied in the various situations.  
Planning for learning outcomes and meeting expectations for both the teacher and the educational 
process in the second culture will be discussed. MI 7030. Three hours.  
 
DI 8080 Modern Trends in Global Mission 
This course examines recent developments in Christian mission against a four-fold backdrop. First, God’s 
divine governance of his world is a foundational reality to be acknowledged. Second, under God’s 
ultimate reign the world changes, as do its various contexts. Third, God specially directs and empowers 
his redemptive mission throughout the earth. Fourth, historically Christian mission efforts have arisen 
within settings determined by the three facets just listed. Modern mission trends can thus best be 
examined by keeping in view this four-fold backdrop of God’s governance, changing world contexts, 
Spirit-led mission, and mission history. MI 6210. Three hours. 
 
 
DI 8200 Encountering Islam 
This course is intended to give the student an understanding of the true nature of the religion of Islam.  
It has become the second most influential religion in the world, next to Christianity itself.  In our day 
Islam has taken on the reputation of a terrorist organization that is only a short way from holding the 
world hostage to its demands.  How much is true?  Where does this emphasis come from?  What does 
Islam say about itself?  And what should our response be?  IM 8300, MI 5300. Three hours. 
 
DI 8220 Cultures of the Old Testament 
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the Old Testament period.  Special emphasis will be placed on key people groups and political, 
cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the Bible. Students will 
learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, sociology, philosophy, politics, literature, 
and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and culture of the people to whom it 
was addressed. Three hours. 
     
DI 8230 Cultures of the New Testament 
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the New Testament and Intertestamental periods.  Special emphasis will be placed on key people 
groups and political, cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the 
New Testament.  Students will learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, sociology, 
philosophy, politics, literature, and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and 
culture of the people to whom it was addressed.  PM 5060. Three hours. 
 
DI 8300 Ethics and Morality Across Cultures 
All Christians hold values derived from their culture. Many, if not most of these values, shape the 
expression of Christianity in their culture. Much of this is good as it reflects how Christianity is relevant 
in their context. In many cases, cultural norms define what obedience to God’s Word should look like in 
that particular context in regard to expressions of God’s will such as “honor your father and your 
mother,” and “husbands love your wives,” or yet “steal no longer….”  These culturally defined behaviors 
seek to respect God’s will and honor His name, but they depend on cultural definitions and therefore 

change from culture to culture. Obedience to God’s will is, to some extent, relative to the context in 
which it is practiced. It is not a question of whether a man should love his wife or not, but rather a 
question of how he should do that. Issues of ethics and morality often cause conflict between people of 
different cultures. This course seeks to reveal and discuss God’s Word on these vital issues. Three hours. 
DI 8310 History of Missions 
The backgrounds and development of the mission enterprise from the apostolic period until the present 
are analyzed in view of their benefit to the intercultural task before us today. A proper understanding of 
the work of the Holy Spirit in this endeavor is emphasized. To give the student a good grasp of present-
day major movements, significant current trends in missiological thought and practice will be examined. 
Three hours. 
 
DI 8330 Biblical Apologetics 
This course seeks to persuade men, women, and children individually and corporately to consider, to 
compare, to clarify, and hopefully to believe in the exclusive truths and uniqueness of the person of 
Jesus, the Christ, in the midst of and often in direct opposition to their current faith system. Three hours. 
 
DI 8410 Spiritual Conflict 
The purpose of this course is to expose the student to a range of approaches to spiritual warfare and to 
explore and explain the biblical data on the subject.  Biblical teaching and examples in Old and New 
Testaments will be explored.  Various authors will be examined in their approach and models for 
spiritual warfare.  At the end of the course the student will be able to discuss issues within spiritual 
conflict with clarity and address issues of concern with wisdom and tact.  Finally, the student will be able 
to explain and apply a biblical approach to spiritual warfare in life ministry, which will be demonstrated 
through a class project. Three hours. 
 
DI 8500 Discerning God’s Will  
The purpose of this course is to expose the student to traditional ways of “finding” God’s will for one’s 
life and then to explore and explain the biblical data on the subject. Biblical teaching and examples in 
Old and New Testaments will be explored. Various authors will be examined to determine their 
approach and models for decision making and the will of God. At the end of the course the student will 
be able to discuss the normally illusive subject of God’s will with clarity, speak to the subjective nature 
of popular theories on the subject, and own a personal theology of God’s will for the believer. PM 8500, 
MI 7090. Three hours. 
DI 8515 Biblical Teamwork in Ministry    
The student will study the biblical principles that mandate teamwork in the world mission task 
concentrating on God’s approach to man in general and the models and teachings of the Gospels and 
the Book of Acts. The biblical perspectives on training leadership, as well as the cultural aspects involved 
in doing that in a second culture, are studied. Various leadership-training models are presented and 
evaluated. Three hours. 
 
DI 8900 Independent Research Elective 
Students in the DICS program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
intercultural situation. A research paper including related materials will be the final product of the study. 
Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of the 
program.  The research may take one of two tracks: missiological research or an area study. 
Missiological research is in-depth study in an area in the field of missiology. It is reserved for upper-level 
students upon approval of the Director of the DICS Program and is pursued under his supervision. A 
research paper, accounting of time, and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required.  

Area studies are an examination of the secular and ecclesiastical history, the present social, economic, 
political, educational, and religious situation, and the cultural themes of a country that are of import to 
the student. A research paper and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required. Three 
hours. 
IM 8150 Mission Strategy 
This course will provide examples of the application of strategic planning from the New Testament, in 
particular from the ministry of the apostle Paul.  Throughout the course we will attempt to keep our 
focus on the supreme purpose of human history, the calling out and perfecting of the Bride of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.  A clear vision of the glory of the Church is our main asset for effective ministry. MI 6140. 
Three hours. 
 
IM 8960 Research in Intercultural Ministry 
This course is an Independent Study which takes place under the supervision of a Grace Seminary 
Professor. Students desiring to complete an Independent Study must have proven previous ability to 
complete doctoral level work, apply to the Director of the Doctoral of Intercultural Studies program in 
writing, and submit a written proposal. Three hours. 
 
PM 8030 Gospel Centered Ministry 
The gospel is not merely the door that gets us into the Christian life, but the means by which we 
continue to experience all that God is and has done for us in Jesus Christ.  As such the central task of 
ministry is to articulate and apply the gospel to every area of life.  This class will explore the nature of 
the gospel and how to make it the functional center of all that we do in ministry.  PM 7050. Three hours. 
 
PM 8190 Evangelism and Discipleship 
This course considers such issues as: a) the context of society which we are called to disciple and the 
need to think cross-culturally in order to impact America for Christ; b) the responsibility of the church 
and the perspectives she must embrace in order to obey God, as well as continue to exist; c) the 
responsibilities and priorities of the church, which emphasizes the call for churches to be about the 
business of evangelism and discipleship; d) different styles for church ministry; and e) strategies for 
personal and corporate evangelistic and discipleship efforts. PM 6720. Three hours. 

TH 6910–6930 Independent Study in Theology 
From one to three credit hours may be earned for guided independent study. A focused area of study 
within the disciplines of this department is chosen with the approval of a faculty member. Generally, a 
reading report and a fully documented research paper will be the final result. All proposals must be 
submitted in writing to the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary after approval has been obtained 
from the department. One to three hours. 
TH 7100 Advanced Systematic Theology 
Building on a foundation of basic orthodox systematic theology, students will explore the issues that 
create tensions within a theological system. Particular attention will be focused on contemporary 
theological questions relating to topics such as inspiration, the nature of God, personal eschatology, etc. 
Students will be expected to prepare position papers, which are to be defended in class. Prerequisites: 
TH 505 and TH 506 or their equivalents. Three hours. 
Old Testament Studies 
Since the Old Testament, like the New, is divinely inspired, it must be given serious attention as an 
indispensable source for doctrine, correction, and spiritual growth. Its narratives provide hundreds of 
examples of God’s dealings with humankind, and by this we gain important insights into the heart of 
God and His expectations for His people. Its poetry exhibits the joys and agonies of those who pursued 
godliness, and its prophecies reveal God’s concern for Israel in ancient times as well as the future. The 
Old Testament is critical to the work of the pastor or Christian leader in preaching, teaching, discipling, 
counseling, and dealing with the challenges of administration. 
The seminary, therefore, requires all M.Div. candidates to acquire the ability to translate the Hebrew 
text of the Old Testament, to gain some practical work in the field of scientific exegesis, and to study the 
methods and results of biblical archaeology, literary criticism, and ancient near eastern backgrounds. 
The ultimate goal of these disciplines is not for mere intellectual entertainment, but to enable the 
student to present the theological, historical, and practical truths of the Old Testament through 
expository preaching and teaching. 
OT 5065 Old Testament Survey - Course offered online only 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament. Three hours. 
 
OT 5000 Old Testament Introduction 
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament.  Three hours.  
 

OT 6010 Old Testament Theology 
An overview of the content, history, and theology of the Old Testament as it serves as a foundation for 
understanding the New Testament, for the church and the Christian life. Special attention is given to the 
development of Old Testament theology and major Old Testament themes. Students with no prior 
background in Old Testament studies may be required to complete assignments that will provide a 
survey of the Old Testament. Three hours.  MIN 5205, BIB 4215. 
OT 6040 Biblical Hebrew I 
This course introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Hebrew with emphasis on phonology, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will learn how to pronounce and read biblical Hebrew, 
the form and function of the noun and verb, the basic syntax of Hebrew words, phrases, and clauses.  
Three hours. 
OT 6050 Biblical Hebrew II 
This course further considers elements of Hebrew grammar at the beginning level with a focus on the 
regular verb, vocabulary, and intermediate syntax. The student will build on the foundation laid in OT 
604, Biblical Hebrew I. Prerequisite: OT 6040. Three hours. 
OT 6060 Biblical Hebrew III 
This course further considers Hebrew grammar and vocabulary at the intermediate level with a focus on the 
remaining stems and the Hebrew weak verb. Designed to prepare the advancing Hebrew student for 
exegetical study by a detailed consideration of Hebrew syntax and the reading and translating of selected 
texts. Prerequisite: OT 6050. Three hours. 
OT 6910–6930 Independent Study in Old Testament 
From one to three credit hours may be earned for guided independent study. A focused area of study within 
the disciplines of this department is chosen with the approval of a faculty member. Generally, a reading 
report and a fully documented research paper will be the final result. All proposals must be submitted in 
writing to the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary after approval has been obtained from the 
department. One to three hours. 
OT 7020 Old Testament Research Project  
Careful exegetical research into an issue or problem relating to the Old Testament text or its 
interpretation or application. The research is to be written up in a 25 page formal paper. For topic 
approval and writing guidelines, the student must contact the chair of the Department of Old Testament 
Studies. Three hours. 
OT 7040 Hebrew Exegesis I 
This course is a practical study of the procedures for doing sound exegesis in the various portions of the 
Old Testament. The method will include the study of syntax, words, poetics, textual criticism, biblical 
theology, and practical exegetical exposition in the different genres of the Hebrew Bible. The student 
will be introduced to the electronic tools available to aid in the preparation of sound, biblically-based 
sermons/lessons. The course is designed to help the student prepare for the future use of the skills in 
the ministry of the Word. Prerequisite: OT 6050. Three hours. 
OT 7050 Hebrew Exegesis II 
An exegetical study of selected portions of the Hebrew Old Testament in the original language designed 
to show its theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: OT 7040. Three hours. 

OT 7420 Advanced Hebrew Exegesis 
Further exegetical study of selected portions of the Hebrew Old Testament including wisdom literature 
and poetry, designed to show their theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: OT 7050. 
Three hours. 
OT 7510–7530 Independent Study in Hebrew 
Three hours of credit may be earned for guided independent study in Hebrew. The course must be 
approved in writing by an Old Testament professor and the Dean of the Seminary. Prerequisite: OT 
7050. Three hours. 
New Testament Studies 
The purpose of the Department of New Testament is to equip students to work in the Greek New 
Testament—exegetically and theologically—in order that they might accurately interpret and apply the 
New Testament. Special emphasis is devoted to developing proficiency in the art of exegesis. Students 
receive instruction in Culture, Literature and History of the NT World, New Testament Greek grammar 
and syntax, textual criticism and literary analysis, resolving historical/grammatical/ lexical/theological 
issues, and biblical theology, all of which enables students to move from exegesis to biblical exposition 
and culturally relevant application. 
GRE 1010 New Testament Greek I 
This course introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Greek with emphasis on phonology, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will learn how to pronounce and read biblical Greek, 
the forms and functions of the various parts of speech, and the basic syntax of Greek words, phrases, 
and clauses. Zero hours. 
GRE 1020 New Testament Greek II 
This course further introduces the student to the essentials of biblical Greek with emphasis on 
phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The student will grow in the ability to pronounce and 
read biblical Greek, the forms and functions of the various parts of speech, and the basic syntax of Greek 
words, phrases, and clauses Students will also begin study of Greek grammar and vocabulary at the 
intermediate level. It is designed to prepare the advancing Greek student for exegetical study by a 
detailed consideration of Greek syntax and the reading and translating of selected texts. Prerequisite: 
GRE 1010. Zero hours. 
NT 5320 New Testament Survey - Course offered online only 
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, 
literary composition, theology and message.  After successfully completing this course, the student 
should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of 
various concepts of the New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the 
purpose and general content of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New 
and Old Testaments, and the use of the New Testament in modern ministry. MIN 5210. Three hours. 
 
NT 6020–6040 Independent Study in Greek 
This course is a guided independent study in biblical Greek. The course must be approved in writing by a 
New Testament professor and the Vice President and Dean of the Seminary. Prerequisite: NT705. One to 
three hours. 

NT 6810–6830 Independent Study in New Testament 
Independent studies are designed for advanced New Testament Greek students who wish to do 
independent research on some aspect of New Testament studies not treated in other courses. 
Evaluations are based upon reading reports and a fully documented research project proportionate to 
the number of credit hours desired to be earned. One to three credit hours may be earned in any one 
subject of study. All proposals must be submitted in writing to the Vice President and Dean of the 
Seminary after approval has been obtained from the chair of the Department of New Testament Studies. 
Prerequisite: NT 7040 or equivalent. One to three hours. 
NT 7020 New Testament Research Project 
Careful exegetical research into an issue or problem relating to the New Testament text or its 
interpretation and application. The research is to be articulated in a major research paper (length 
determined by the professor). For topic approval and writing guidelines, the student must contact the 
Professor of New Testament Studies. Three hours. 
NT 7040 Greek Exegesis I1 
This course is a practical study of the procedures for doing sound exegesis in the various portions of the 
New Testament. The method will include the study of syntax, words, poetics, textual criticism, biblical 
theology, and practical exegetical exposition in the different genres of the Greek New Testament. The 
student will be introduced to the electronic tools available to aid in the preparation of sound, biblically-
based sermons/lessons. The course is designed to help the student prepare for the future use of the 
skills in the ministry of the Word. Prerequisite: GRE 1020. Three hours. 
NT 7050 Greek Exegesis II 
An exegetical study of selected portions of the Greek New Testament in the original language designed 
to show its theological, expository, and practical values. Prerequisite: NT7040. Three hours. 
NT 7420 Advanced Greek Exegesis 
This course examines further the exegetical study of selected portions of the Greek New Testament (as 
determined by the professor), designed to show their theological, expository, and practical values. 
Prerequisite: NT7050. Three hours. 
 
Pastoral Studies 
The Department of Pastoral Studies seeks to channel the student’s academic training received in the 
other departments of the seminary into effective pastoral ministry—whether demonstrated in the 
pulpit, in the pastor’s study, in board meetings, or in the educational programs of the church. 
In all areas, the Word of God must be applied to the lives of those to whom God has graciously given it. 
It must be delivered to the lost through the work of evangelism; it must be given to God’s redeemed 
people through educational programs designed for nurture and equipping; it must be applied to special 
personal needs in the pastor’s office. 
This department, therefore, is a part of the “how to” segment of the seminary program, instructing the 
student in appropriate perspectives and attitudes for ministry. This department also seeks to provide 
                                                             
1 Students must take GRE 1010 and GRE 1020 or pass a Greek Entrance Exam as prerequisites for Greek Exegesis I. 
 

instruction in the needed skills and methods for applying God’s Word to life with wisdom and 
effectiveness. Believing firmly that the local church is the center of God’s operations in the world, we 
focus every part of the instructional program on the ministry of the local church. Experienced pastors 
are used in the classroom and as mentors in order to enhance ministry skills and effectiveness. 
PM 5040 Interpersonal Communication and Conflict Management 
Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics, and 
roles and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 
in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development. MIN 5005. Three hours. 
 
PM 5080 Pastoral Ministry Skills 
A biblical, theological, and practical consideration of the pastor’s call, character, and ministry 
responsibilities. Instruction will focus on pastoral skill development in areas such as leadership, public 
speaking, worship service coordination, pastoral care, disciple-making, administering the ordinances, 
and conducting weddings and funerals.  
 
PM 5560 Exegetical Resources and Tools 
This course provides the student with the knowledge and skills necessary for the accurate studying and 
applying of Scripture as a key to their vocational ministry. In this course the student will be introduced 
to the necessary tools, both online and printed, as well as various methods and tools necessary for a 
comprehensive and faithful study of Scripture. 
 
PM 6010 Spiritual Formation 
This course investigates the biblical and personal foundations of spiritual growth known theologically as 
sanctification. It is designed to help the learner understand the impact of family history, personal 
development and life experiences on one’s theological outlook, emotional maturity, relational patterns, 
moral decisions and ministry effectiveness. Through personal prayer projects, experiential learning and 
small group interaction, learners will gain a richer sense of self-awareness in order to open more deeply 
to the love and truth of God. This integrative course attempts to connect theological truth to life in 
order to explore God’s design for growth and how the individual might cooperate within the context of a 
developing relational Christian spirituality. MIN 6010. Three hours. 
PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching 
This course is designed to provide instruction and experience in the process of communicating God’s 
truth to people through the avenues commonly referred to as “teaching” and “preaching”. It introduces 
a functional methodology of organizing and developing the components of sermons, and examines 
issues related to the bridging of exegesis and exposition. It also explores some of the elements of how to 
“connect” with contemporary audiences and maintain their attention. Learning will be accomplished 
through (a) classroom instruction, dialogue, and group activities and (b) a preaching/teaching lab 
experience. This lab experience is intended to provide an environment where the student may gain 
benevolent feedback while perfecting skills in the oral presentation of biblical truth. Prerequisite: 
TH5090. Three hours. 
 
PM 6220 Advanced Preaching Seminar 
This is a 3 credit hour course that is dedicated to building upon the instruction and experience gained 

through PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching (which is a prerequisite).  It will address an array of 
sermonic issues—content, form, delivery—and especially will seek to identify ways of handling different 
biblical genres and different sermon focuses (e.g., evangelistic, doctrinal, etc.). The course will also 
encourage experience in creative methodologies of preaching, methodologies designed to impact 21st 
century listeners. Prerequisite: PM 6210 Expository Preaching and Teaching. MIN 5345. Three hours. 
 
PM 6340 Ministry Preaching & Teaching 
This course is designed to provide instruction and experience in the process of communicating God’s 
truth to people.  It introduces methodology of organizing and developing the components of sermons 
and examines issues related to the bridging of exegesis and exposition.  It also explores some of the 
elements of how to “connect” with contemporary audiences and maintain their attention.  Learning will 
be accomplished through digesting class lectures, reading textbooks, discussion of teaching, 
methodology, constructing and delivering sermons, processing the feedback of others and engaging in 
self-assessment. MIN 5340. Three hours. 
 
PM 6460 Ministry Philosophy for the Church – Course offered online only 
This course seeks to promote appropriate ministry perspectives especially as applied to the local church 
in North America. Two main areas will receive attention: 1) the attitudes and responsibilities of a servant 
leader of the local church, and 2) a philosophy of local church ministry. In addition, a variety of specific 
applications of New Testament ecclesiology are discussed and applied to contemporary life and ministry. 
MIN 5350. Three hours. 
 
PM 6600 Principles & Practice of Prayer 
This course will take an in-depth look at prayer as God’s means of leading and strengthening faithful 
servants for His work among Christians and non-Christians of this age. Christian ministry depends on an 
intimate walk with God for stability and ongoing effectiveness of the ministerial servant, for spiritual 
formation in the lives of those to whom we minister, and for the strategic planning necessary for 
effective missional ministry. Not only will the theology and instructions about prayer be examined, but it 
will be practiced in meaningful ways throughout the seminar. (PG) PM 8250, MI 6600, MIN 6600. Three 
hours. 
PM 6910–6940 Independent Study in Pastoral Ministries 
A limited number of credit hours (a maximum of four) may be given for independent study done outside 
the context of a classroom course. Special outside seminars with additional reading and reporting as 
assigned by the supervising professor can be used in this regard. One to four hours. 
PM 7000 Leadership in the Local Church 
Through the use of reading and writing assignments, pastoral interviews, and a self-assessment and 
action plan paper, the following leadership topics will be covered: servant leadership, mentoring, 
visionary leadership, and leading as a change agent.  Three hours. 
PM 7010 Ministry Leadership 
This course is designed to strengthen leadership skills for ministry.  A study and interaction with these 
topics will implement that purpose: servant leadership, mentoring, visionary leadership, and leading as a 
change agent.  The methods will include reading and writing assignments, online discussions, pastoral 
interviews, a self-assessment and an action plan paper. The course work will be conducted 
independently, culminating in final papers.  The prof will address the topic of the week.  MIN 5320. 
Three hours. 
 

PM 7120 Local Church Ministry in the 21st-Century 
This course will seek to explore some underlying dynamics of local church life, along with some of the 
dominant ministry styles of contemporary North American churches, including both attractional and 
missional models. Focus will also include church assessment paradigms, a consideration of change 
strategies, and discussion of prevailing attitudes in our society toward the church.  A substantial 
component of the course will include involvement in an off-campus experience designed to expose the 
student to urban ministries.  Three hours. 
PM 7325 Practical Ministry Apprenticeship: Evangelism, Discipleship, and Missions 
The apprenticeship is designed to foster growth in the student’s readiness for leadership and servant 
ministry in a local church, ministry organization or mission.  The apprentice will work under the 
mentorship of an experienced ministry professional who, in cooperation with Grace Seminary, will give 
assignments, evaluate the student’s fulfillment of assignments and meet regularly with the apprentice. 
The student will provide to Grace Seminary evidence of having accomplished a specific number of 
competencies, the number depending on the credit hours being granted for the apprenticeship.  The 
student will be required to complete a small amount of academic work (books read, papers written, 
etc.), the amount to be commensurate with the credit hours being granted for the apprenticeship.   
Three hours. 
PM 7610–7630 Degree Project 
By means of this special course, the student will complete work designed to inaugurate or substantially 
revise an area of ministry in which he or she is personally interested. A prospectus must be submitted to 
the project coordinator prior to the beginning of the semester during which the project will be studied 
and completed. It must provide the information required in the “Guidelines for Degree Projects” 
available from the seminary professors of pastoral ministry. One to three hours. 
  
Women’s Leadership Studies 
PM 5040 Interpersonal Communication and Conflict Management 
Theoretical principles of interpersonal communication and conflict management skills will be applied to 
ministry settings in order to equip the learner to work more effectively with a variety of people in 
diverse settings. Through course material, individual reflection, and small group experiences, learners 
will explore the biblical foundations of relationships, personal relating style, small group dynamics, and 
roles and conflict management skills. The focus of this course contains principles for evaluating 
relational maturity, elements that help and hinder spiritual community and skills for dealing with conflict 
in healthy ways utilizing effective communication skills necessary for personal and ministerial 
development.  
MIN 5005. Three hours. 
 
 
PM 5070 Equipping Others for Ministry 
This course will help you see that ministry is not just about doing the ministry yourself, but teaching 
others to join you in various arenas of ministry.  You will learn about God’s equipping ministry in your 
own life, and be challenged to imitate His methods of entrusting others with redemptive work through 
His Spirit.  The class will explore various methods of equipping others, including mentoring, coaching and 
modeling, and will address the challenges of recruiting, training and retaining volunteers or key staff 
members. MIN 5110. Three hours. 

 
MI 5250   Understanding and Engaging Culture  
This course examines culture.  It explores the roots of culture as a foundational and overarching 
expression of humanities vocations as “imaging” of God in Scripture. The subsequent harmonies and 
dissonances between historical expressions of culture and Christianity are analyzed and discussed.  Also, 
contemporary expressions of popular digital culture, film, video and music, will be selectively surveyed 
with an eye to developing the capacity to constructively and critically engage culture as 
Christians.  Three hours 
 
PM 5340 Women in Scripture 
Students will explore the various roles women played in the OT against the backdrop of the ancient 
world. They will investigate ways that Jesus elevated the status of women and how NT passages 
describe the function of women within the Christian community. Using modern theories on the role of 
women—hierarchical, complementarian, and egalitarian—students will seek to define a biblical 
approach to contemporary questions about the role of women. MIN 5360. Three hours. 
PM 5550 Biblical Foundations of Leadership 
This course looks at the life of Jesus to learn from Him as the Master Teacher, Leader and Discipler.  
Students will explore Scripture and the lives of other godly men and women to gain a composite picture 
of leadership that addresses heart issues in the lives of people they will lead.  Leadership from a biblical 
perspective will be countercultural and address issues of pride vs. humility, how we view failure/success 
and taking initiative in a Spirit-driven process.  Students will have the opportunity for hands on 
integration of theory with practice as they process the course concepts in life with others in a relational 
context of ministry. MIN 5600. Three hours. 
 
PM 5730 Soul Care in Leadership 
This class will examine how to journey with others in the midst of their questions and pain. Instead of 
trying to fix others in pain, soul care attempts to incarnate the presence of God in the life of another and 
allow God to use you to be his hands and feet. Part of this process is learning how to listen to the Spirit 
of God and attend to another in the midst of their journey. The learner will have the opportunity to see 
and reject patterns of self-talk (based on the flesh) in order to embrace Spirit-led patters of soul talk. 
The care of souls is an interpersonal part of ministry leadership that often gets overlooked in our 
program-driven church context. This class will help to equip ministry leaders in their role as shepherd to 
the flock entrusted to their care. MIN 5820. Three hours. 
  
Pastoral Counseling Studies 
PM 5330 Counseling Theories 
In this course, students will examine today’s predominant counseling theories in order to develop their 
own biblical framework in which they will provide counsel to others. The focus of the course is to help 
discern God’s pathway to proper biblical counseling. MIN 5500. Three hours. 
PM 5520 Counseling Methods and Techniques 
This course will examine the various skills, methods and techniques used by a Christian or Pastoral 
Counselor to effectively minister to those being counseled. An aspect of the course is how to use the 
Bible and prayer in counseling, and direction on when to refer to other professionals.  MIN 5700.       
Three hours.  
 

PM 5800 Pre-Marital and Marital Counseling 
This course will examine how to effectively engage in pre-marital counseling to help couples prepare for 
marriage and to help couples who are struggling in their marriage. Various theories, skills and 
techniques of marriage counseling will be discussed. MIN 5900. Three hours. 
PM 6160 Biblical Psychology 
This course will examine the relationship between the fields of psychology and theology. A theology of 
“integration” will be presented, along with discussions concerning specific “psychological” topics (i.e. 
personality, sensation/perception, self-esteem, etc.) from a biblical vantage point. A biblical discussion 
of depression and anxiety will be an aspect of this course, along with how one would use this material to 
counsel/minister to others. Three hours. 
Intercultural Studies and World Missions 
The Department of Intercultural Studies and World Mission is aimed at instilling in the heart of every 
student, a world vision and a passion for reaching that world. The curriculum is prepared to meet the 
needs of both experienced missionaries desiring graduate study as well as eager recruits preparing for 
cross-cultural ministry. Four things characterize this program: vision for global ministry, prayer and the 
recognition of dependence on God’s strength, skill development for effective intercultural ministry, and 
teamwork to multiply spiritual energies. 
MI 5010 Biblical Theology of Missions 
A course on the biblical basis and theological framework for world mission showing how that endeavor 
is the purpose of God as he reaches out to his creation. God is a missional God and all theology has a 
missional purpose since it concerns the God of mission and the mission of God. The course develops the 
concepts of how theological categories are inherently missiological and missiological categories 
intensely theological. DI 8530, MIN 6100.  Three hours. 
  
MI 5120 Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Eastern world are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism, Chinese Popular Religion (Taoism and Confucianism, with 
reflections of Taoism in Native American Religion), and Shintoism. These will be introduced with a short 
Theology of Religions.  Three hours. 
MI 5130 Middle-Eastern World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions originating and concentrated in the Middle East are 
studied with a view to understanding why the tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. 
How each religion affects the host culture and how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The 
inadequacies of each belief system will be discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, but an 
introductory understanding of biblical theology is assumed.   Religions covered in the course include 
Judaism, Islam, Baha’i, Zoroastrianism (Zarathustrism), and African Animism. These will be introduced 
with a short Theology of Religions and comments on why various religions have similarities with others.  
Three hours. 

MI 5250   Understanding and Engaging Culture 
This course examines culture.  It explores the roots of culture as a foundational and overarching 
expression of humanities vocations as “imaging” of God in Scripture. The subsequent harmonies and 
dissonances between historical expressions of culture and Christianity are analyzed and discussed.  Also, 
contemporary expressions of popular digital culture, film, video and music, will be selectively surveyed 
with an eye to developing the capacity to constructively and critically engage culture as 
Christians.  Three hours 
 
MI 5300 Encountering Islam 
This course will cover the origins of Islam as well as its beliefs and practices from both the Qur’an and 
the Hadith literature and traditions. The life of Muhammad and the Qur’an itself will be studied from the 
standpoint of original Muslim sources. Faith and practice in modern-day Islam in its various forms, 
Islam’s response to Christianity, and Christianity’s response to Islam will be explored. Students will 
research and present findings on issues in Islam. Practical ways to reach out to Muslims will be 
discussed. DI 8200, IM 8300. Three hours. 
MI 5540 Ministry & Cultural Diversity 
The goals for this course are (1) to give Christian ministry students as awareness of the nature of cultural 
systems and how they affect ministry in multi-cultural settings and (2) to give them insights, methods, 
and skills for adapting their perspective and activities for a relevant ministry to those of other cultural 
backgrounds. MIN 5310. Three hours. 
 
MI 6030 Intercultural Communication 
A study of the principles and processes of communicating effectively with people from a second cultural 
context. The course focuses on functional perception and how cultural worldview, beliefs, and values 
affect that through the personal perception of each individual. The shaping of the message, style of 
communication, and communication networks for each cultural context are explored with a view to 
penetrating each culture as deeply as possible with the Gospel. The dangers of ethnocentrism and some 
current methods of contextualization are discussed. PM 5490, PM 8620, DI 8030, IM 8620, MIN 6400.  
Three hours. 
MI 6060 Applied Cultural Anthropology 
The nature of man and how his culture affects him are explored with a view to how this, in turn, affects 
ministry in intercultural contexts. Worldview assumptions and resulting values, beliefs, behavior, and 
attitudes are studied as to how they affect the person in his perception and understanding of the 
physical and spiritual world around him and, ultimately, his understanding of the Gospel. Social 
organization is examined as to how it affects ministry strategy and the nature of culture change is 
investigated with a view to evangelism. MIN 6300. Three hours. 
MI 6080 Teamwork and Leadership Training in Missions 
The student will study the biblical principles that mandate teamwork in the world mission task 
concentrating on the unity of the Godhead as the ultimate model for all unified human relationships. 
Attention is given to God’s model of reproducing reproducers as His intended normative approach to 
leadership. The transcultural application of the relationship of Father, Son and Holy Spirit will be 
carefully studied.  Three hours. 
MI 6090 Principles of Contextualization 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 

context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture. The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in Bible interpretation and the importance of taking into consideration 
the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. Emphasis is 
given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text was written. 
Prerequisite: MI 6060. Three hours. DI 8040. 
 
MI 6600 Principles and Practice of Prayer 
This course will take an in-depth look at prayer as God’s means of leading and strengthening faithful 
servants for His life and ministry. A large section at the outset of the course is dedicated to studying the 
prayer life and prayer teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. Additionally, significant questions and issues 
about prayer are given careful study. Students are expected to establish a prayer partnership during the 
class to apply what they are learning. PM 6600, PM 8250, MIN 6600. Three hours.  
MI 7160–7190 Missiological Research 
Missiological research is in-depth study in an area in the field of missiology. It is reserved for upper-level 
students upon approval of the department chairman and is pursued under his supervision. A research 
paper, accounting of time, and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required. Prerequisite: 
MI 606. One to four hours. 
MI 7210–7230 Readings in World Religions and Ideologies 
This is a guided independent study course designed to give the student an overall knowledge of the 
religious contexts of the world that the Gospel must penetrate. As a major part of most cultural 
worldviews, religions, and religious themes will be studied by the student in detail with a view to their 
function in the society where they are found. Students will search for bridges for communication of the 
true Gospel in each religious context. Attention will be given to Animism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, 
and their variant forms, as well as many smaller religious systems. One to three hours. 
MI 7290 Intercultural Apprenticeship  
The Intercultural Apprenticeship is a guided experience and study program in a cross-cultural setting. It 
involves a culture discovery program for gaining insights into the target culture and understanding the 
people in their actual situation. It provides exposure to the culture in various areas and experience in 
various levels of evangelism, discipleship, and church development within this new environment giving 
the student practical, intercultural encounters for the exercise of the student‘s theoretical learning. 
Students also take a distance education course in mission history while in the cross-cultural context and 
can become a part of the ongoing history in that particular country.  Prerequisites: MI 6060 and MI 
6030. Six hours. 
 
MI 7300 Cross-Cultural Internship/Apprenticeship   
Achieving competence in a second culture can only come about if intercultural training is combined with 
experience in that culture that is concerned with discovery of the cultural system and building 
relationships of trust. It is the goal of the Cross-Cultural Internship to provide that experience and 
practice. The concepts covered in the courses of Applied Cultural Anthropology and Intercultural 
Communication will become operational in the actual context of the new culture providing for 
intentional adaptation. Complete culture discovery guidelines are provided and put into practice under 
the oversight of an experienced mentor in that cross-cultural context. Twelve hours. 
 
MI 7920–7940 Cross-Cultural Internship 
The mission internship is a guided experience and study program in a cross-cultural setting. It involves a 
culture discovery program for gaining insights into the target culture and understanding the people in 

their actual situation. It provides experience in various levels of evangelism, discipleship, and church 
development within this new environment giving the student practical, intercultural encounters for the 
exercise of the student’s theoretical learning. Prerequisite: MI 606. Two to four hours. 
 
Deploy Course Descriptions 
Note: DGM (MDiv) and DLC (MALCM) – Credits are credit equivalencies 
 
DGM 5050 | DLC 5050 Orientation and Student Success 
Students will be competent to enter the Deploy program, demonstrating understanding of its 
distinctives, tuition and billing, financial aid, student support services, academic policies, and enrollment 
and withdrawal information. Students will be competent to use key website throughout their Deploy 
program, including the Learning Management System (Canvas), the Portal, and Nelnet. Students will also 
demonstrate an ability to succeed in Deploy by doing reliable research and writing at a graduate level. 
Students will demonstrate this by knowledge and practice of: 1) proper format (Turabian), 2) guidelines 
to proper citation methods (preventing plagiarism), 3) grammatical structure and syntax, 4) 
compositional skills (thesis statement, topic sentence, providing evidence for claims, persuasion, clear 
structure, introduction and conclusion), 5) acquiring information from appropriate academic resources 
(e.g. scholarship: peer reviewed, edited/published materials). Zero hour prerequisite course.   
DGM 5100-5103 | DLC 5100-5103 Embracing Sanctification 
Students will be competent to understand and cooperate with God in the sanctification process. In order 
to be competent in this process, the student will grow in acquiring double knowledge: knowledge of God 
and knowledge of self. This knowledge deals with the root of heart issues out of which flow either the 
fruit of righteousness (leading to life) or the fruit of unrighteousness (leading to death). The biblical 
mandate to put off the old man and put on the new man is fundamentally a matter of the heart, not of 
behavioral modification. Therefore, signs of growth include 1) rejecting lies, which includes brokenness 
and repentance over sin, while, 2) embracing the truth of one’s life in Christ, lived out through pursuing 
transformation of the mind through the hungry intake of the Truth. The mind set on the Spirit will 
produce the fruit of the Spirit. The student will also need to understand the common stages related to 
spiritual formation and be able to identify key markers in each phase of the journey, including God’s use 
of consolation and desolation to promote growth. The spiritual disciplines become tools to open oneself 
to God; and in the process, what’s in one’s heart will be revealed. Competence in double knowledge 
recognizes that spiritual disciplines enable a person to humbly position themselves to hear God speak 
and to invite Him to do His transforming work. Practicing the spiritual disciplines requires significant 
effort, but as Dallas Willard says, God is opposed to earning, not effort. What happens in the disciplines 
such as solitude, reading God’s word, praying (including intercession, petitions, listening, and worship), 
or fasting only have value in as much as they foster an intimate and dependent relationship with God. 
Three hours.  
*DGM 5200-5202 | DLC 5200-5202 Thinking Critically in Ministry was previously offered but has been 
removed from the program. It’s learning outcomes have been reallocated into modules within DGM/DLC 
5800 and 5900. MA students will take DLC 5904 and 5905 in lieu of DLC 5200-5202, or be permitted to 
seek course substitution to fulfill their degree requirements. MDiv students are not permitted to seek 
course substitution to fulfill their degree requirements in light of the MDiv program’s overall reduction 
from 90 to 75cr. 

DGM 5300-5303 | DLC 5300-5303 Becoming a Mature Disciple 
Students will be competent in the process of becoming a mature disciple who is loving God and loving 
others. Students will learn to relate to God in a healthy manner. This involves a fully devoted heart that 
embraces Christ as King, where the pilgrim gives Him full authority and allows Him to prioritize his/her 
value system. In order to relate to God in this way, the mature disciple will grow in understanding the 
role of the human heart, the complexity of this biblical concept, and the realities of how the heart is 
shaped. The problem with a sinful heart is that it desires self and sin rather than God and His way. Even 
as a Christian, one needs to be aware of the sinful tendencies that are still at work in the redeemed 
heart, so that the life of Christ may be fully appropriated. Three hours.  
*DGM 5400-5202 | DLC 5400-5202 Research and Writing was previously offered but has been removed 
from the program. It’s learning outcomes have been reallocated into modules within DGM/DLC 5800 
and 5900. MA students will take DLC 5804 in lieu of DLC 5400-5402, or be permitted to seek course 
substitution to fulfill their degree requirements. MDiv students are not permitted to seek course 
substitution to fulfill their degree requirements in light of the MDiv program’s overall reduction from 90 
to 75cr. 
 
DGM 5500-5503 | DLC 5500-5503 Practicing Biblical Hermeneutics 
Students will be competent to understand and apply hermeneutics. The student will be competent to 
demonstrate a basic understanding of the history and contemporary practice of biblical interpretation 
and its foundational principles and tools while maintaining a commitment to the reliability of the Bible 
as demonstrated by its authority, inerrancy, and inspiration. Students will apply these principles and 
tools to their own personal study and application of Scripture and in ministry related projects to improve 
the student’s ability to prepare and deliver hermeneutically sound preaching and teaching materials in 
their ministry context. Three hours. 
DGM 5600-5603 | DLC 5600-5603 Understanding Biblically Healthy Churches 
Learners will be competent to understand and articulate the nature of biblically healthy churches. The 
student will need to be able to translate the nature of biblically healthy churches into their current social 
context; and be able to implement strategies to establish healthy churches in different contexts. Those 
strategies must include viable approaches to the teaching of God’s word, corporate worship, evangelism 
(same culture and cross culture), discipleship and multiplying leaders. Three hours. 
DGM 5700-5703 | DLC 5700-5703 Exercising Flexibility in Ministry 
Learners will be proficient to exercise appropriate flexibility. The student will become aware of personal 
preferences and learn to deal with them in a way which avoids the tendency toward legalism, and 
instead, demonstrates grace-filled respect; discerns the difference between flexibility and people 
pleasing; and distinguish the difference between conviction driven leadership and high control-low 
trust-driven leadership. In addition, in the spirit of the Apostle Paul’s words, “I have become all things to 
all men that I might save some,” the student will develop a growing level of cultural flexibility which 
flows from a knowledge of and respect for diverse cultures through an exposure to different people 
groups. Three hours. 
DGM 5800-5812 | DLC 5800-5804 Applying Biblical Exegesis 
Students will be competent in Biblical Exegesis. The student will be competent to use an exegetical 
method to accurately interpret genre, language, and literary structures to understand the 
redemptive/historical/sociocultural context of the Bible, and do proper theological analysis while using 
the best available resources. MDiv: Twelve hours. MA: Four hours. 

DGM 5900-5906 | DLC 5900-5905 Articulating Biblical Theology 
Students will be competent to articulate and apply Biblical Theology. The student will be competent to 
describe and articulate the history, methodology, and content of Biblical Theology. Special attention is 
given to the progressive revelation and development of Scripture’s main storyline, key themes, 
continuity and discontinuity between the Old and New Testaments, and a gospel-centered, Christ-
focused, canonically-sensitive approach to reading and interpreting the Bible as they relate to one’s 
personal life, the lives of Christians, and local ministry context. MDiv: Six hours. MA: Five hours. 
DGM 6000-6015 Utilizing Biblical Languages 
Students will be competent to apply the basics of phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary of 
biblical Greek and Hebrew to their study of Scripture. This competency will cover the essentials of 
Biblical Greek and Hebrew with an emphasis on phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. The 
purpose is to understand Biblical Greek and Hebrew for the purpose of translating and doing exegesis in 
the Hebrew Old Testament and Greek New Testament. MDiv Only: Fifteen hours. 
 
DGM 6100-6106 Applying Foundational Doctrines 
The student will be competent to evaluate, synthesize, articulate, and apply foundational doctrines in 
the different areas of Systematic Theology including: Bibliology, Theology Proper, Christology, 
Pneumatology, Angelology, Anthropology, Hamartiology, Soteriology, Ecclesiology, and Eschatology as 
they relate to one’s personal life, the lives of Christians, and the local ministry context. MDiv Only: Six 
hours.  
DGM 6200-6203 Understanding the Development of Doctrine 
Students will be competent to understand and articulate an overview of the development of doctrine in 
the church. The student will be competent to understand the development of doctrine in the church 
from the Apostolic Fathers through the 21st century.  This includes church confessions, major 
theological movements and controversies, and important theologians.  The student will demonstrate 
the ability to apply insights gleaned from historical theology to one’s own Christian life, local ministry 
context, and current challenges for theology and the Church. MDiv Only: Three hours.  
DGM 6300-6303 | DLC 6000-6003 Embodying the Love of God 
Students will be competent to show love and compassion to others. Those who are learning 
competence to show love and compassion have experienced the initiating love of God at an in-depth 
level for themselves. Relating to others in love requires discerning and demonstrating appropriate ways 
to nurture growth in the life of another. They are committed to becoming an exceptional listener by 
soliciting feedback from others as they develop empathy. They exercise the freedom to both nurture 
and confront, to rescue and release, and to discern when to reach out and when to wait. They are not 
motivated by a Messiah complex [unrealistic valuation of their own importance and ability to save 
people, but are compelled by love (2 Cor. 5:4)]. They are developing boundary-setting habits in order to 
prioritize loving their family, while showing compassion to those within and outside the church. They 
learn from those who have established a track record of loving “hard to love people” within their sphere 
of influence. They follow the example of Christ whose rhythm of life included loving extravagantly and 
being replenished deeply through intimate times with His Heavenly Father and selected disciples. They 
seek out authentic friendship and spiritual community for mutual encouragement. Three hours.  
DGM 6400-6403 | DLC 6100-6103 Embracing Cultural Diversity 
Students will be competent to understand cultural diversity. The student will understand cultural 
diversity as a learner who observes, listens, reads, and carefully studies his/her audience. Able to discern 
the difference between cultural absolutes and biblical absolutes. Appreciative of how culture affects our 
understanding and application of the biblical text in our own and other cultures. Translates 

understanding of cultural diversity into appropriate and culturally relevant, biblical ministry within 
diverse contexts. Three hours.  
DGM 6500-6503 | DLC 6200-6203 Articulating Personal Theology 
Students will be competent to articulate their own theology in light of their denominational/church 
affiliation. Students will understand and be able to articulate and explain their own theological 
convictions as they relate to their denominational or church affiliation, and complete the necessary 
preparations for ordination, or as if they were pursuing ordination. Three hours.  
DGM 6600-6603 | DLC 6300-6303 Resolving Leadership Conflict 
Learners will become competent to grasp and adapt to leadership pressures, conflict, and criticisms that 
are inherent in transformational ministry. This competency requires a leader to understand personal 
leadership tendencies due to family background and other personal influences (people and 
experiences), taking steps toward building on the strengths and being released from unhealthy patterns. 
A leader is fundamentally a Christ follower, who is teachable and solicits wisdom from relevant 
resources. This type of leader is learning to avoid the tendency to discount one’s own voice, giftedness 
and Spirit-led convictions. Doing so, prevents pitfalls such as plagiarizing sermons, idolizing Christian 
celebrities, and attempting to clone successful programs without discernment. A growing leader learns 
to manage his/her own life by exercising self-control that intentionally pursues whatever is pure, true, 
noble, right, lovely and admirable and avoids compromising situations. Competent leaders learn to face 
and process criticism and conflict in redemptive ways. Three hours.  
DGM 6700-6703 | DLC 6400-6403 Communicating God’s Truth 
Students will be competent to communicate God’s truth in diverse contexts and by various methods 
based on a thorough understanding of the content, intent, and structure of the biblical text. Mastery of 
this competency leads to a clear, authoritative, and contextual delivery of the biblical message. This 
encompasses an accurate knowledge of the audience. This also includes the integration of biblical truth 
into the life of the speaker. Learners who master this competency will be able to teach others to do 
likewise. Three hours. 
DGM 6800-6803 | DLC 6500-6503 Initiating Transformational Change 
Students will be competent to be a change agent who leads churches (or ministries) to become or 
remain biblically healthy by articulating Christ-centered values and vision, developing strategies that 
unify churches around these values and vision, and initiating transformational rather than merely 
transactional change. Three hours.  
 
Doctor of Ministry  
 
DI 8030 Intercultural Communication  
A basic understanding of this foundational element in all intercultural ministries is developed in the class 
and in assigned reading. Communication itself is discussed in its various facets, and then each facet is 
considered as to how it creates meaning in other cultures for real communication. Social, cultural, 
linguistic, and psychological barriers to good communication in a second culture are considered. Other 
areas covered are intercultural education and leadership training. Three hours.  
 
DI 8140 Cultural Anthropology for Ministry 
This course provides basic understandings in cultural anthropology for effective cross-cultural and 
multicultural ministries. It shows the importance of knowing anthropological concepts to gain and 
maintain that effectiveness and gives the student an understanding of culture with its behavior, values, 

beliefs, and the assumptions that lie behind them. Among other concepts, the course covers social 
systems, role and status, rites of passage, enculturation, acculturation, and culture shock. Also discussed 
are cultural values on time, thinking, decision-making, morality, individualism, conflict, logic, and 
ambiguity. It deals with the complexities of culture change and how worldview affects that change. 
Students will discover many of their own cultural values through the course, an essential element in 
understanding and working with a second culture. Three hours. 
DI 8150 Contextualization for Ministry 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 
context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture.  The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in biblical interpretation and the importance of taking into 
consideration the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. 
Consideration is given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text 
was written. This course also prepares pastors for multicultural situations in preaching and teaching 
ministries. MI 6090. Three hours. 
 
DI 8160 Church Planting and Growth 
An intensive study of the biblical definition of a local church and how that becomes the goal in 
church planting. New Testament early church forms and methods of expansion are 
investigated. An examination of the spiritual foundation and the principles and methods of 
evangelism and discipleship is undertaken with a special emphasis given to the training of 
nationals and the transfer of leadership to them. 
 
 
DI 8280 Doctoral Research Methods 
Essential techniques of qualitative and quantitative research are taught and practiced. The appropriate 
uses of social research are explored through research reports and case studies. Students use practice 
exercises to demonstrate their ability to conduct research, interpret the results, and apply findings to 
practical situation in ministry settings. Three hours. 
 
DI 8520 World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions are studied with a view to understanding why the 
tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. How each religion affects the host culture and 
how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The inadequacies of each belief system will be 
discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, thus, an introductory understanding of biblical 
theology is assumed.   Three hours. 
IM 8150 Mission Strategy 
This course will provide examples of the application of strategic planning from the New Testament, in 
particular from the ministry of the apostle Paul.  Throughout the course we will attempt to keep our 
focus on the supreme purpose of human history, the calling out and perfecting of the Bride of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.  A clear vision of the glory of the Church is our main asset for effective ministry. MI 6140. 
Three hours. 
 
IM 8300 Encountering Islam 
This course is intended to give the student an understanding of the true nature of the religion of Islam.  
It has become the second most influential religion in the world, next to Christianity itself.  In our day 

Islam has taken on the reputation of a terrorist organization that is only a short way from holding the 
world hostage to its demands.  How much is true?  Where does this emphasis come from?  What does 
Islam say about itself?  And what should our response be?  DI 8200, MI 5300. Three hours. 
 
IM 8960 Research in Intercultural Ministry 
Students in the D.Min. program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
intercultural situation. A research paper including related ministry materials will be the final product of 
the study. Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of 
the D.Min. program. Three hours. 
PM 8010 Practice of Ministry Leadership 
A study of the biblical and theological concepts of ministry of leadership. Special emphasis upon an 
analysis of administrative and leadership functions and the practical implementation of management 
principles, the development of leaders and team-building in the local church. Three hours.  
 
PM 8100 The Effective Communicator 
The goal of the course is to increase a speaker’s ability to develop messages which are: True to the 
biblical text; Clear and well-organized; Interesting to listen to; Specifically relevant to the listener’s 
needs. Students will learn (a) how to determine the specific applications of a biblical passage and (b) 
how to help listeners follow the unfolding of the message. These practical skills will be developed 
through instruction, examples, group interaction and personal use. PM 7130. Three hours. 
 
PM 8130 Old Testament Preaching and Teaching 
This course focuses on some of the basic themes of the Old Testament and how to present them 
powerfully from the pulpit or in teaching situations. Appropriate hermeneutical strategies will be 
applied to different genres of the Old Testament. Attention will also be given to the application of these 
truths to personal spiritual growth. Specific Old Testament problems will be analyzed and discussion will 
be centered on how to use these problems positively in ministry. This is a practical course that deals 
with the tools and concepts that help preachers prepare sermons. OT 7000. Three hours. 
 
PM 8260 Current Theological Issues 
This seminar coordinates study and discussion of current theological issues and trends that are 
impacting the church. Special attention is given to the application of these issues and trends to real life 
settings. This course is team taught.  
Theology.  TH 7101. Three hours. 
 
PM 8370 Change and Conflict Management 
An examination of advantages and disadvantages of pastoring an established church; how to assess and 
implement changes for continuing progress in growth and ministry. Special focus on how to rally support 
from other leadership and then the church people. Three hours. 
  
PM 8410 High Impact Expository Preaching Method  
A study of the High-Impact Expository Preaching (HIEP) Method.  Attention will be focused on 
developing a deep understanding of the impact of anointed expository preaching using a Bible-centric, 
skill-based, and outcome driven method. Three hours. 
 
PM 8420 High Impact Expository Preaching Lab  
A practical preaching lab requiring a step-by-step application and mastery of the High-Impact Expository 
Preaching (HIEP) Method.  Learners will demonstrate growing expertise in Bible-centric, outcome-driven 

preaching in both the individual aspects of the HIEP method, in addition to expository preaching as a 
whole. Three hours. 
 
PM 8430 High Impact Expository Exegesis  
An exegetical approach in which students will learn to accurately mine the biblical text for the sermon’s 
central proposition as well as the subsequent outline and content, using the High Impact Expository 
Preaching (HIEP) Method. Three hours. 
 
PM 8440 Multi-Sensory Preaching 
An application of current educational psychology and brain research in the field of homiletics.  Involves 
the recognition and engagement of listeners’ senses in the congregational preaching context to drive life 
transformation through engaging learners’ attention, comprehension, retention, and application of 
God’s Word. Three hours. 
 
PM 8510 Foundations for Ministry 
Required of all D.Min. students, this course is designed to prompt students to rethink the foundational 
values that drive them and to gain personal feedback from those closest to them. The instructors will 
seek to help participants reflect upon needs for personal growth and ministry skill development, as well 
as issues for appropriate theological investigation and cultural relevancy. Opportunities will be given to 
assess strengths and weaknesses, including the use of testing tools and the development of a plan for 
enhancing areas of potential growth. (PG) PM 7311. Three hours. 
PM 8530 Strengthening Spiritual Vitality 
God’s grace is expressed not only in salvation but also in the Christian life-in forgiving, accepting, 
enabling, sustaining, equipping and empowering the believer. This course examines the true meaning of 
grace, the need for grace (even for believers), the effectiveness of grace in developing Christ-like 
character and the relationship of God’s grace and the believer’s practice of spiritual disciplines in 
Christian growth. Subjects to be covered include: living by grace, preaching grace-based messages, 
creating a grace environment in the local church, understanding grace as a motivation for both 
sanctification and Christian service, and the importance of the practice of spiritual disciplines.  PM 6530. 
Three hours. 
 
PM 8610 Pastoral Counseling 
This course considers various needs that occur in the context of pastoral ministry and offers insights to 
understand the complexity of people's emotional and spiritual problems in the church. The 
psychological approaches with Biblical and theological perspectives provide effective solutions for those 
people in need. 
 
PM 8630 Leadership and Growth Pipeline  
A biblical and organizational analysis of the leadership and growth needs of ministries, resulting in the 
development of a discipleship-based strategy for sustainable outreach, evangelism, catechesis, 
assimilation, formation, and leadership production, as evidenced by demonstrable numerical growth. 
Three hours. 
 
PM 8670 Team Staffing, Mentoring, and Coaching  
A biblical and theological overview of ministry leadership as it pertains to coordinating the work of the 
ministry through volunteer and paid ministry staff.  Special attention given to providing advanced 
strategic equipping in hiring, positioning, equipping, overseeing, mentoring, and coaching ministry 
professionals. Three hours. 

 
PM 8830 Advanced Shepherding  
An advanced biblical, theological, and practical consideration of the pastor’s role and responsibilities as 
the shepherd of God’s flock. Special focus on effective pastoral care including disciple making strategy, 
conflict resolution, ministry to the suffering and grieving, interpersonal relationship skills, spiritual 
formation in small groups, and pastoral counseling. Three hours. 
 
PM 8840 Ministry Vision and Strategy  
A theological overview of management and leadership principles involved in the identification and 
execution of a God-given ministry vision and strategy.  Includes attention to identifying the knowledge, 
skill sets, tools, and competencies required for effective visioneering, vision-casting, and strategic 
planning required to move an organization to mission-vision-goal fulfillment. (3 hours)    
 
PM 8850 Ministry Alignment and Execution  
A theological analysis of biblical and organizational principles effective in the planning, organization, 
resourcing, and execution of ministry goals.  Special emphasis to be given on expertly motivating and 
mobilizing a well-organized and empowered team of highly-equipped people to reach the multifaceted 
goals of a church or Christian ministry. Three hours. 
 
PM 8950 Research in Pastoral Ministry 
Students in the D.Min. program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
pastoral situation. A research paper including related ministry materials will be the final product of the 
study. Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of the 
D.Min. program. Three hours. 
PM 8990 Doctor of Ministry Professional Project–All Concentrations 
D.Min. candidates must successfully complete a major ministry project at the conclusion of their course 
work. This project should involve an actual ministry situation or program need and incorporate 
significant theological and theoretical research. A project report of 125–200 pages must be submitted. 
For deadlines, consult the Doctor of Ministry Handbook. Six hours. 
 
Doctor of Intercultural Studies  
DI 8030 Intercultural Communication  
A basic understanding of this foundational element in all intercultural ministries is developed in the class 
and in assigned reading. Communication itself is discussed in its various facets, and then each facet is 
considered as to how it creates meaning in other cultures for real communication. Social, cultural, 
linguistic, and psychological barriers to good communication in a second culture are considered. Other 
areas covered are intercultural education and leadership training. IM 8620, MI 6030, MIN 6400, PM 
5490, PM 8620. Three hours.  
 
DI 8080 Modern Trends in Global Mission (Online Seminar) 
This course examines recent developments in Christian mission against a four-fold backdrop. First, God’s 
divine governance of his world is a foundational reality to be acknowledged. Second, under God’s 
ultimate reign the world changes, as do its various contexts. Third, God specially directs and empowers 
his redemptive mission throughout the earth. Fourth, historically Christian mission efforts have arisen 
within settings determined by the three facets just listed. Modern mission trends can thus best be 

examined by keeping in view this four-fold backdrop of God’s governance, changing world contexts, 
Spirit-led mission, and mission history. MI 6210. Three hours.   
 
DI 8140 Cultural Anthropology for Ministry 
This course provides basic understandings in cultural anthropology for effective cross-cultural and 
multicultural ministries. It shows the importance of knowing anthropological concepts to gain and 
maintain that effectiveness and gives the student an understanding of culture with its behavior, values, 
beliefs, and the assumptions that lie behind them. Among other concepts, the course covers social 
systems, role and status, rites of passage, enculturation, acculturation, and culture shock. Also discussed 
are cultural values on time, thinking, decision-making, morality, individualism, conflict, logic, and 
ambiguity. It deals with the complexities of culture change and how worldview affects that change. 
Students will discover many of their own cultural values through the course, an essential element in 
understanding and working with a second culture. PM 8810, IM 8810, MI 6410. Three hours. 
DI 8150 Contextualization for Meaningful Ministry 
This course prepares the student to fit evangelism, church planting, church development, and relief 
ministries into the social and cultural context of the receiving people. It majors on preparing 
missionaries to plant Christianity in the soil of the targeted people group so it will grow up within their 
context rather than to spread a veneer of Christian values over that culture.  The contextualization of 
methodology, theology, and forms and expressions in the local church is discussed. The danger of 
Western values being expressed in biblical interpretation and the importance of taking into 
consideration the religious worldview and the definitions used in the receiving culture are discussed. 
Consideration is given, as well, to the differences of the cultural context within which the biblical text 
was written. This course also prepares pastors for multicultural situations in preaching and teaching 
ministries. MI 6090. Three hours 
 
DI 8160 Church Planting and Growth 
An intensive study of the biblical definition of a local church and how that becomes the goal in church 
planting. New Testament early church forms and methods of expansion are investigated. An 
examination of the spiritual foundation and the principles and methods of evangelism and discipleship is 
undertaken with a special emphasis given to the training of nationals and the transfer of leadership to 
them. 
 
DI 8180 Cross-Cultural Leadership Development 
Students who complete this course should be able to: (1)evaluate the models demonstrated and 
teaching given on leadership development in the Old and New Testaments, including the concept of 
servant leadership, (2)distinguish the cultural factors that impact on the development of effective 
Christian leaders in a specific culture, (3)compare and contrast different cultural leadership styles and 
development processes, and (4)design a leadership development process appropriate to a specific 
culture. Three hours. 
 
DI 8240 Directed Research and Writing (Online Seminar) 
Learners will engage in exploration of potential supporting themes related to their future dissertation 
topic. This involves designing a detailed topic-driven outline, then conducting a targeted research 
project under the direction of a DICS faculty member. The online class research project will involve the 
identification and use of quality digital, print, and other research, resulting in a comprehensive 
annotated bibliography, then a formal precedent literature draft paper. Three hours 
 

DI 8280 Doctoral Research Methods 
Essential techniques of qualitative and quantitative research are taught and practiced.  The appropriate 
uses of social research are explored through research reports and case studies.  Students use practice 
exercises to demonstrate their ability to conduct research, interpret the results, and apply findings to 
practical situations in ministry settings. MI 6200. Three hours. 
 
DI 8520 World Religions 
In this course the belief systems of major religions are studied with a view to understanding why the 
tenets make sense and drive behavior for the adherents. How each religion affects the host culture and 
how the culture affects the religion will be explored. The inadequacies of each belief system will be 
discussed in light of the adequacy of Christianity, thus, an introductory understanding of biblical 
theology is assumed.  IM 7020, MI 6420. Three hours. 
 DI 8530 Biblical Theology of World Mission 
A course on the biblical basis and theological framework for world mission showing how that endeavor 
is the purpose of God as he reaches out to his creation. God is a missional God and all theology has a 
missional purpose since it concerns the God of mission and the mission of God. The course develops the 
concepts of how theological categories are inherently missiological and missiological categories 
intensely theological. The missio Dei is scrutinized in terms of the nature, goal, story, and methods of 
that mission. Three hours. 
 
DI 8580 World Religions in Mission 
This course provides a clear introduction to the major world religions, examining their religious 
traditions of the world in light of their history, worldview, practices, places, philosophies, and ideals. 
These include the Primitive religions, Zoroastrianism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Cheondoism, 
Shintoism, Confucianism, and Daoism. In addition, by identifying these major religions of the world, this 
course challenges students to familiarize themselves with these religions and contextualize efficiently 
within the diversity of religiosity for a more effective mission. Three hours. 
 
DI 8980 Professional Research Project: Intercultural Studies  
DICS candidates must successfully complete a major research project at the conclusion of their course 
work. This project should involve the research of an actual intercultural ministry situation problem, 
program need, or missiological question and incorporate significant theological and missiological, 
theoretical research. The proposal for the research will be approved by the advising faculty.  A 
dissertation of 225–250 pages must be submitted. For details and deadlines, consult the Doctor of 
Intercultural Studies Handbook. Eight hours. 
PM 8260 Current Theological Issues 
This seminar coordinates study and discussion of current theological issues and trends that are 
impacting the church. Special attention is given to the application of these issues and trends to real life 
settings. This course is team taught. TH 7101. Three hours. 
PM 8610 Pastoral Counseling 
This course considers various needs that occur in the context of pastoral ministry and offers insights to 
understand the complexity of people's emotional and spiritual problems in the church. The 
psychological approaches with Biblical and theological perspectives provide effective solutions for those 
people in need. 
 
 

ELECTIVES 
 
DI 8060 Cross-Cultural Education  
An emphasis is put on educational principles and then relates them to teaching and learning styles of 
other cultures.  Traditional learning styles will be explored for other cultures with a view to the best 
formal, informal, and non-formal methodologies that might be applied in the various situations.  
Planning for learning outcomes and meeting expectations for both the teacher and the educational 
process in the second culture will be discussed. MI 7030. Three hours.  
 
DI 8080 Modern Trends in Global Mission 
This course examines recent developments in Christian mission against a four-fold backdrop. First, God’s 
divine governance of his world is a foundational reality to be acknowledged. Second, under God’s 
ultimate reign the world changes, as do its various contexts. Third, God specially directs and empowers 
his redemptive mission throughout the earth. Fourth, historically Christian mission efforts have arisen 
within settings determined by the three facets just listed. Modern mission trends can thus best be 
examined by keeping in view this four-fold backdrop of God’s governance, changing world contexts, 
Spirit-led mission, and mission history. MI 6210. Three hours. 
 
 
DI 8200 Encountering Islam 
This course is intended to give the student an understanding of the true nature of the religion of Islam.  
It has become the second most influential religion in the world, next to Christianity itself.  In our day 
Islam has taken on the reputation of a terrorist organization that is only a short way from holding the 
world hostage to its demands.  How much is true?  Where does this emphasis come from?  What does 
Islam say about itself?  And what should our response be?  IM 8300, MI 5300. Three hours. 
 
DI 8220 Cultures of the Old Testament 
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the Old Testament period.  Special emphasis will be placed on key people groups and political, 
cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the Bible. Students will 
learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, sociology, philosophy, politics, literature, 
and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and culture of the people to whom it 
was addressed. Three hours. 
     
DI 8230 Cultures of the New Testament 
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the New Testament and Intertestamental periods.  Special emphasis will be placed on key people 
groups and political, cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the 
New Testament.  Students will learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, sociology, 
philosophy, politics, literature, and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and 
culture of the people to whom it was addressed.  PM 5060. Three hours. 
 
DI 8300 Ethics and Morality Across Cultures 
All Christians hold values derived from their culture. Many, if not most of these values, shape the 
expression of Christianity in their culture. Much of this is good as it reflects how Christianity is relevant 
in their context. In many cases, cultural norms define what obedience to God’s Word should look like in 
that particular context in regard to expressions of God’s will such as “honor your father and your 
mother,” and “husbands love your wives,” or yet “steal no longer….”  These culturally defined behaviors 
seek to respect God’s will and honor His name, but they depend on cultural definitions and therefore 

change from culture to culture. Obedience to God’s will is, to some extent, relative to the context in 
which it is practiced. It is not a question of whether a man should love his wife or not, but rather a 
question of how he should do that. Issues of ethics and morality often cause conflict between people of 
different cultures. This course seeks to reveal and discuss God’s Word on these vital issues. Three hours. 
DI 8310 History of Missions 
The backgrounds and development of the mission enterprise from the apostolic period until the present 
are analyzed in view of their benefit to the intercultural task before us today. A proper understanding of 
the work of the Holy Spirit in this endeavor is emphasized. To give the student a good grasp of present-
day major movements, significant current trends in missiological thought and practice will be examined. 
Three hours. 
 
DI 8330 Biblical Apologetics 
This course seeks to persuade men, women, and children individually and corporately to consider, to 
compare, to clarify, and hopefully to believe in the exclusive truths and uniqueness of the person of 
Jesus, the Christ, in the midst of and often in direct opposition to their current faith system. Three hours. 
 
DI 8410 Spiritual Conflict 
The purpose of this course is to expose the student to a range of approaches to spiritual warfare and to 
explore and explain the biblical data on the subject.  Biblical teaching and examples in Old and New 
Testaments will be explored.  Various authors will be examined in their approach and models for 
spiritual warfare.  At the end of the course the student will be able to discuss issues within spiritual 
conflict with clarity and address issues of concern with wisdom and tact.  Finally, the student will be able 
to explain and apply a biblical approach to spiritual warfare in life ministry, which will be demonstrated 
through a class project. Three hours. 
 
DI 8500 Discerning God’s Will  
The purpose of this course is to expose the student to traditional ways of “finding” God’s will for one’s 
life and then to explore and explain the biblical data on the subject. Biblical teaching and examples in 
Old and New Testaments will be explored. Various authors will be examined to determine their 
approach and models for decision making and the will of God. At the end of the course the student will 
be able to discuss the normally illusive subject of God’s will with clarity, speak to the subjective nature 
of popular theories on the subject, and own a personal theology of God’s will for the believer. PM 8500, 
MI 7090. Three hours. 
DI 8515 Biblical Teamwork in Ministry    
The student will study the biblical principles that mandate teamwork in the world mission task 
concentrating on God’s approach to man in general and the models and teachings of the Gospels and 
the Book of Acts. The biblical perspectives on training leadership, as well as the cultural aspects involved 
in doing that in a second culture, are studied. Various leadership-training models are presented and 
evaluated. Three hours. 
 
DI 8900 Independent Research Elective 
Students in the DICS program may receive permission to do independent study relating to a specific 
intercultural situation. A research paper including related materials will be the final product of the study. 
Only one independent study of this nature may be considered as meeting the requirements of the 
program.  The research may take one of two tracks: missiological research or an area study. 
Missiological research is in-depth study in an area in the field of missiology. It is reserved for upper-level 
students upon approval of the Director of the DICS Program and is pursued under his supervision. A 
research paper, accounting of time, and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required.  

Area studies are an examination of the secular and ecclesiastical history, the present social, economic, 
political, educational, and religious situation, and the cultural themes of a country that are of import to 
the student. A research paper and a reading report with annotated bibliography are required. Three 
hours. 
IM 8150 Mission Strategy 
This course will provide examples of the application of strategic planning from the New Testament, in 
particular from the ministry of the apostle Paul.  Throughout the course we will attempt to keep our 
focus on the supreme purpose of human history, the calling out and perfecting of the Bride of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.  A clear vision of the glory of the Church is our main asset for effective ministry. MI 6140. 
Three hours. 
 
IM 8960 Research in Intercultural Ministry 
This course is an Independent Study which takes place under the supervision of a Grace Seminary 
Professor. Students desiring to complete an Independent Study must have proven previous ability to 
complete doctoral level work, apply to the Director of the Doctoral of Intercultural Studies program in 
writing, and submit a written proposal. Three hours. 
 
PM 8030 Gospel Centered Ministry 
The gospel is not merely the door that gets us into the Christian life, but the means by which we 
continue to experience all that God is and has done for us in Jesus Christ.  As such the central task of 
ministry is to articulate and apply the gospel to every area of life.  This class will explore the nature of 
the gospel and how to make it the functional center of all that we do in ministry.  PM 7050. Three hours. 
 
PM 8190 Evangelism and Discipleship 
This course considers such issues as: a) the context of society which we are called to disciple and the 
need to think cross-culturally in order to impact America for Christ; b) the responsibility of the church 
and the perspectives she must embrace in order to obey God, as well as continue to exist; c) the 
responsibilities and priorities of the church, which emphasizes the call for churches to be about the 
business of evangelism and discipleship; d) different styles for church ministry; and e) strategies for 
personal and corporate evangelistic and discipleship efforts. PM 6720. Three hours.


Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 7 
February 2023 
 
BIB2010 Scripture and Interpretation 
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and small group Bible 
study leadership. Observational skills of the English text will be developed through hands-on activities 
and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical genres with the goal of 
equipping the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary context. 
Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. Three credit 
hours 
 
BIB3300 Essential Doctrinal Themes 
This course is designed to engage the student in the essential doctrines of the Christian Faith and to help 
them complete the desired transference from belief to conviction in their personal faith.  The purpose of 
this class is to examine eight areas of theology in such a manner as to allow the learner to search the 
Scriptures so they can begin to articulate and defend what they believe about the Christian 
faith.  Special attention will be given to helping the student grasp the historical doctrinal commitments 
of Grace College and Seminary by engaging students in class discussion around those commitments. 
Three credit hours. 
 
FYE1000 First-Year Foundations 
This course will help students discover their God-given strengths, navigate through current college 
issues, and help the student better understand what makes a Christian liberal arts education valuable. It 
will also introduce students to the value off-campus involvement and introduce students to prospective 
departments and faculty within the institution, assisting in the selection process of choosing a major and 
a career. This course is designed to make students’ years at Grace the best experience possible. Three 
credit hours.  
 
ECN3000 Consumer Economics  
Consumer Economics is a course designed to prepare students to understand the economic system from 
a Biblical perspective and how it affects individuals as consumers, producers and citizens. Students will 
integrate knowledge, skills and practices required for management of resources in a technologically 
expanding global economy. Real world topics covered will include income, money management, 
spending and credit, as well as saving and investing. Core skills in decision making, problem solving, 
critical thinking, goal setting, management of multiple roles and using technology are integrated into the 
course content. Three credit hours. 
 
PHI3010 Christianity and Critical Thinking 
This course will critically examine the beliefs and presuppositions of philosophers and philosophies over 
the centuries and their impact on modern Christianity and the Christian Worldview.  A critical 
examination will begin by utilizing the lens of Scripture as the basis of truth in evaluating these 
beliefs.  The application of that examination will be centered on the reasons for God as well as the 
nature of suffering and evil as learners are encouraged to formulate a biblically sound Christian 
Worldview. Three credit hours. 
 
 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 8 
February 2023 
 
COM1100 Public Speaking 
The objective of this course is to provide students with an introduction to the principles of public 
discourse and civic engagement. The focus will be on a practical background in recognizing, analyzing, 
and constructing arguments in the public sphere. Readings, class time, and assignments will focus on the 
skills and concepts necessary for successful application of the principles to a civic engagement project. 
Three credit hours, including lab. 
 
ENG1100 Effective Writing 
This course is designed to help you develop and hone the skills involved in clear and persuasive writing 
at the college level and beyond. While the primary focus of this course is scholarly writing, we will also 
explore other genres of writing important to civic life, such as the personal expressive narrative, 
rhetorical analysis, and opinion/editorial essay.  Three credit hours. 
 
PSY1200 Essentials of Behavioral Science 
This introductory course in Behavioral Sciences provides an opportunity to learn about various 
behavioral science topics, concepts and real life applications. This course will survey multiple topics as 
they relate to relationships. Students will also be encouraged during this course to increase personal 
awareness of how cognitive and emotional factors influence behavior in a variety of social contexts. The 
focus of this course is on improving relationships in many different sectors of life. Three credit hours.  
 
HIS 1050 Current Issues in Historical Context  
This class examines the historical and political development of at least two broad topics that remain 
part of contemporary discussion and illustrate the way the past can help students understand 
current debates and conversations. The topics chosen are meant to represent areas of significant 
concern for understanding current issues and moral questions. The course asks the question, “How 
did we get here?” and provides a foundation for discussions of diversity, citizenship, Christian 
ethics, and cultural awareness. Topics will likely change over time. Three Credits. 
 
HUM2000 Global Perspectives  
The purpose of Global Perspectives is to encounter world cultures through literature, film, and dialogue. 
In this interdisciplinary course, students engage divergent outlooks from around the world, grappling 
with cultural differences and presuppositions. This course cultivates cultural competency, provides a 
framework for understanding God’s heart for the nations, and prepares students for the Cross-Cultural 
Field Experience. Three credit hours. 
 
HUM2100 Creative Arts and Culture 
Through a global, thematic approach, this course explores the human phenomenon of creativity. Posing 
the question "Why creative arts?' this course focuses on exploring how culture and creativity reflect 
each other within the realm of visual and performing arts. Through themes of survival, religion, the 
state, and self, this course examines artists’ roles within cultures, the way art is made or performed, 
how meaning is derived, and how art is used, kept or destroyed. Required experiential activities for 
engaging in visual and performing arts include such things as attending museum exhibits, concerts or 
theatrical productions.  Three credit hours. 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 9 
February 2023 
 
SCI2030 Faith, Science, and Reason 
Faith, Science, and Reason is designed to assist the student in (1) demonstrating the scope and 
magnitude of science and mathematics; (2) why we study these subjects; (3) knowing the limitations of 
these subjects; (4) where the Christian fits and operates within the scientific paradigm; and (5) how a 
Christian can incorporate their faith and reason within the scientific enterprise and how to use it as a 
productive platform when communicating to those of different worldviews. Three credit hours.  
 
 
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 
 
BBL2010 Understanding the Old Testament  
An introduction to the Old Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, literary 
composition, theology and message. After successfully completing this course, the student should be 
able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of various 
concepts of the Old Testament, the historical milieu of each Old Testament book studied, the purpose 
and general content of each Old Testament book studied, the use of the Old Testament in modern 
ministry, and the foundation the Old Testament provides for the New Testament. Three credit hours 
 
BBL2020 Understanding the New Testament  
This course introduces the New Testament with special reference to background, historical setting, 
literary composition, theology, and message. After successfully completing this course, the student 
should be able to demonstrate a knowledge of background issues which introduce one to the study of 
various concepts of the New Testament, the historical milieu of each New Testament book studied, the 
purpose and general content of each New Testament book studied, the relationship between the New 
and Old Testaments, and the use of the New Testament in modern ministry. Three credit hours. 
 
BIB2310 History of Christianity  
Students will seek to discover what transpired in Christianity from the 1st century to modern times in 
order to understand what Christianity is in the present. They will identify the major events, 
personalities, and theological issues, both Western and non-Western, that shaped the development of 
Christianity. They will appreciate the challenges that the church faced as it matured in history, and they 
will gain perspective on the challenges still facing the church today. Prerequisite: BIB1050. This is an 
upper level course available to juniors and seniors. It is also offered at a graduate level. Three credit 
hours. 
BBL3010 Defining Doctrines of the Christian Faith  
Students will identify the central affirmations of Christianity that distinguish orthodoxy from heresy, 
heterodoxy, liberalism, and neo-orthodoxy. Students will be able to support each defining doctrine from 
Scripture. The role of creeds, church councils, and doctrinal statements in defining and preserving 
orthodoxy will be explored. Students will appreciate the diversity within Christian orthodoxy, while the 
central affirmations are preserved. Prerequisite: BIB1050. Three credit hours. 
 
 
 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 10 
February 2023 
 
BBL3090 Spiritual Formation  
Students will explore the various dynamics that converge to produce maturity in the life of a Christian. 
They will seek to construct a theory of spiritual formation based on a practical knowledge of God, a 
realistic awareness of self, a full-orbed understanding of pertinent scriptural insights, and a historical 
perspective of various approaches to spirituality. They will examine the necessity of the integration of 
the individual pursuit of spiritual maturity with the corporate dimension. The approach of the course will 
include practical application along with classroom discussion and outside research. Prerequisite: BIB 
2010. Three credit hours. 
 
MIS3220 Principles and Practice of Prayer  
Students will examine the teaching of the Scriptures on the subject of prayer with a view to discovering 
the absolute necessity of a vital prayer experience in the life of the man or woman of God and in the life 
of the Church. Urgency, consistency, and effectiveness of prayer will all be discussed as well as practical 
guidance for fostering these. Significant time will be spent in the practice of prayer. Three credit hours. 
 
BBL3140 Biblical Backgrounds  
Students will seek to understand how people thought, communicated, and lived in the ancient world 
during the OT, NT and Intertestamental Periods. Special emphasis will be placed on key people groups 
and political, cultural, theological, and literary developments that form the background to the Bible. 
Students will learn to use insights from geography, cultural anthropology, archaeology, sociology, 
philosophy, politics, literature, and history for the interpretation of Scripture in light of the history and 
culture of the people to whom it was addressed. Three credit hours. 
 
BBL 4810 Senior Seminar (Leadership in Ministry)  
This course is designed to facilitate senior level students in the application of theory to ministry practice. 
The learner will be challenged to integrate biblical/theological knowledge gained in a variety of courses 
together with specialized research that pertains to specific ministry issues. Three credit hours. 
MLD 1000 Principles of Ministry Leadership  
This course designed to equip students to serve effectively as ministry leaders in a variety of faith-based 
nonprofit contexts. The course provides an introductory and holistic overview of principles inherent to 
the practice of Christian ministry leadership. Researched based theories and models, organizational 
design, and leadership principles will be discussed and integrated within a framework of biblical, 
theological, organizational, and cultural perspectives. Three credit hours 
 
MLD 2700 Servant Leadership                                                                                                                                               
Servant Leadership (MLD 2700) is designed to guide the student into embracing a Christ-centered 
approach to leadership by means of serving others, focusing on these three dynamics in the life and 
ministry of the servant leader: conviction, character and competence. Included in the course are 
opportunities to learn through reading, participating in discussions, involvement in an interactive video 
course by the instructor, interviewing a seasoned servant leader and hands on experience in serving in a 
current ministry. Three credit hours. 
 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 11 
February 2023 
 
MLD 3000 Nonprofit Financial Management                                                                                                                       
This course will introduce learners to the role of resource management found 
within nonprofit environments. Learners will interact with philanthropy, earned income strategies, 
governmental support, and financial management of such resources. Three credit hours.  
 
MLD 3300 Ministry: Outreach and Care                                                                                                                               
This course focuses on evangelism, missions, social involvement, pastoral care, and community. This 
course assists the student with helping others, planning, and resources. 3 credit hours. 
 
MLD 3400 Communication in Christian Ministry                                                                                                             
This course will look into the importance of communication in leadership 
within Christian Ministry. Communication will be studied within the context of today’s technological, 
strategic and ministerial developments. The course will deal with principles in 
organizational communication” and “communicating in teams and networks.” Focuses will be on the 
analysis of an organization of the student’s choice and on the understanding and completion 
of communication needs within an organization. Three credit hours. 
 
ICS 3650 Intercultural Ministry  
This course is an overview of intercultural missions in which students will discover the importance of 
cultural value systems, intercultural communication, contextualization, and cultural adaptation, and 
how these issues affect biblical ministry in intercultural and multicultural contexts. Future pastors, youth 
ministers, Christian counselors, and other Christian ministry personnel will become more effective in 
various intercultural situations by shaping their ministry to penetrate other cultures more deeply. 
Knowing how culture functions, the extent to which it shapes people, and how we are affected by our 
own culture keeps us from reading our cultural values into other contexts and into our interpretation of 
the Bible. It also guards against unknowingly imposing our cultural values on others. The course will not 
count toward the requirements of an undergraduate intercultural mission minor. Three credit hours. 
 
BBL 3000 Theological Systems  
Students will explore the theological methods and presuppositions practiced by the diversity of 
theological systems. Students will seek answers to questions such as, how is presuppositional 
apologetics different from evidential apologetics. How is systematic theology different from biblical 
theology? How is dispensational theology different from covenant theology? How is reformed theology 
different from Armenian theology? How is progressive dispensationalism different from classic 
dispensationalism? Students will study the methods and presuppositions of leading theologians, from 
the Apostle Paul to the present. Prerequisite: BIB1050. This is an upper level course available to juniors 
and seniors. It is also offered at a graduate level. Three credit hours. 
 
PHI 3000 Apologetics  
The purpose of this course is to provide students with an introductory survey to the defense of the 
Christian worldview in its contemporary postmodern context. The course will cover areas such as: the 
biblical and theological justification for the apologetic task; issues surrounding apologetic methodology; 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 12 
February 2023 
 
strategies for effective presentation and argumentation; the development of a positive case for 
Christianity; common objections against the Christian worldview; and a critique of prevalent ideologies 
and worldviews. This course will address philosophical, historical, scientific, and cultural issues 
surrounding the defense of Christianity in the contemporary world. Three credit hours. 
 
BIB 3290 New Testament Exposition  
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and small group Bible 
study leadership. Observational skills of the English text of the New Testament will be developed 
through hands-on activities and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical 
genres with the goal to equip the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary 
context. Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. 
Prerequisites: BIB1050, BIB2010, and BBL2020. Three credit hours. 
 
BIB 3310 Old Testament Exposition  
Foundational principles of effective Bible study will be applied for personal study and Bible study 
leadership. Observational skills of the English text of the Old Testament will be developed through 
hands-on activities and assignments. Hermeneutical principles will be applied to various biblical genres 
with the goal to equip the learner to interpret the text based on its historical/cultural and literary 
context. Application of the meaning of the text for spiritual formation will be emphasized as well. 
Prerequisites: BIB1050, BIB2010, and BBL2010. Three credit hours. 
 
SOC 1100 Introduction to Sociology  
An introductory study of humans functioning in society. Basic principles of sociology will be experienced 
including organization, structure, strata, and problems in American society. Emphasis will be placed on 
observational techniques that will help to develop a spirit of active participation in the world. Three 
credit hours. 
 
MAT 3200 Probability and Statistics  
This is an introductory course in probability and statistics. Topics covered include probability theorems 
and models, statistical techniques, and practices for applying statistical techniques in the world around 
us. Prerequisites: 12 credit hours; Basic Algebra. Three credit hours. 
 
MLD 2020 Ministry Leadership Seminar 1—Becoming a Disciple of Jesus  
This course will introduce learners to the major issues involved in becoming a disciple of Jesus. Students 
will interact with classroom learning as well as real life ministry experience and mentoring 
relationships. Students will participate in 90 hours of ministry experience during the summer seminar. It 
is strongly suggested but not required that the students participate in a minimum of one ministry 
project during this time. Some ministry projects that would be ideal include mission’s trips, church 
camps, bible camps and other similar activities. Students will turn in their hours to their professor on a 
weekly basis. Students will also participate in mentoring conversations based on the topics of the class. 
The student will meet with an approved mentor for a total of 8 hours during the time frame of the class. 
Six credit hours. 
 
Grace College Akron Catalog | 2023-2025 
 
School of Professional and Online Education 13 
February 2023 
 
MLD 3020 Ministry Leadership Seminar 2—Making Disciples of Jesus 
(Course design in progress) 
Students will formulate the methodology, research best practices, interview ministry personnel, and 
defend the thesis. Six credit hours. 
 
MLD 4020 Ministry Leadership Seminar 3—Leading in Ministry (Course design in progress) 
Students will summarize results and make a presentation to a panel of church administration personnel 
who will evaluate the project on given criteria. Six credit hours. 
 
MLD 3060 Contemporary Ministry Communication 
Contemporary Ministry Communication will introduce students to the foundational skills and dynamics 
of communicating truth with Biblical integrity, humble authority and creative method in teaching and 
preaching in the contemporary world. Emphasizing practice and application in creative communication 
labs, the course will focus not only on the various communicative and rhetorical skills basic to 
communicating God’s words but also on the planning of and preparation for that communication with 
attention to the various settings and to the variety of audiences one might encounter in the church 
today. 
 
 GOL 3010 Fundamentals of Lifelong Learning  
In this course, students will examine adult developmental stages including physical, cognitive, 
personality, social, and moral development. Three hours. 
GOL 3100 Business Writing in the New Millennium 
Students will build a writing portfolio for diverse audiences and purposes. A writing rubric will ensure 
strong ideas, logical organization, conversational voice, clear words, smooth sentences, correct copy, 
and a reader-friendly design. Computer tools will be used to create and enhance written messages that 
meet the needs of today’s fast-paced business environment. Three hours. 
GOL 3150 Creating a Competitive Edge 
This course will take an in-depth view of “personal brand”, requiring students to explore and define 
what unique characteristics give them an advantage in the marketplace. Students will gain an 
understanding of their personal brand and competitive advantage, through biblical and modern a
contexts, in order to fine-tune them accordingly. Other topics covered are online/social media presence 
and the “brand” of Jesus.  Three hours. 
GOL 3200 Expanded Conversation: Public Speaking in the Workplace 
In this course, students will learn to analyze, construct, and deliver a variety of presentations required in 
the modern workplace. Emphasis will be on practicality and individual growth. Three hours. 
GOL 3220 Systems of Social Welfare 
This course provides an overview of the historical, economic, ideological and political foundations of 
social welfare programs and services. Course content provides a fundamental understanding of the 
processes involved in defining social problems, policy making structures and procedures, and current 
social welfare programs and systems within the United States. Three hours. 
GOL 3300 Gifts Differing: Diversity and Teamwork in the Workplace 
Students will gain experience with and knowledge of concepts related to diversity in the workplace. 
Special emphasis is placed on understanding personality preferences. Group dynamics such as power, 
perception, motivation, leadership, and decision-making are analyzed through readings, written 
assignments, and class discussion. Three hours. 


 
GOL 3450 Marketing in a Technological Age 
This course is designed to equip students to use social media, blogs, news releases, online video, and 
viral marketing to reach customers. The course includes an overview of how the web has changed the 
rules of marketing and PR, the various media presently available for marketing use, and the “how-to” 
information to put contemporary marketing models to work in an organization. Students will complete a 
marketing action plan for an organization of their choice to ensure relevance and provide a practical 
application to marketing theory. Three hours. 
GOL 3520 Human Growth and Development 
This course explores the stages of human life, from prenatal development to infancy, childhood, 
adolescence, and adulthood. The life stages are examined from the biological, psychological and social 
perspectives with focus on the implications for the delivery of professional human services. This study 
will include an overview of the major human developmental theories describing the lifespan from birth 
to old age and death. Related topics will include genetics, cognitive and brain development, early life 
experiences and attachment, personality development, gender role, social and moral development, and 
aging. Research in development and developmental psychology will also be introduced. Three hours. 
GOL 3750 Effective Financial Decision-Making 
This course introduces principles and practices used in making wise and effective financial decisions. 
Topics studied in the course include reading financial statements, diagnosing a business’s financial 
strengths and weaknesses, evaluating cash flow amount, variability and riskiness, determining levels of 
risk and rates of return of business investments, and considering the effects of the use of debt in 
enhancing shareholder returns. Three hours. 
GOL 4000 Interpreting Basic Statistics   
Students will learn how to interpret basic statistics to aid in the decision-making process. Examples from 
research studies will be employed to help the student comprehend how various statistics can be used to 
make decisions about real life problems in the workplace. Three hours. 
GOL 4020 Case Management 
This course will introduce the student to case management as a service delivery model in the practice of 
professional human services. Models of case management and the various roles of the human services 
professional will be explored. Intake assessment, service plan development, and record documentation 
will be examined, along with legal and ethical guidelines and considerations in working with diverse 
client populations. Three hours. 
GOL 4050 The Global Environment 
The ubiquitous impact of globalization necessitates an awareness of the global environment. This survey 
course introduces characteristics of the global environment and strategies by which interact in a more 
complex context. Areas reviewed include perspectives on globalization, cross-cultural competencies, the 
role and impact of multi-national corporations, cross cultural factors, and case studies associated with 
global leadership, and global strategies. Three hours. 
GOL 4300 The Dynamic Organization 
The study of organizational development explores how companies must adapt to ever-changing internal 
and external environments in order to thrive in today’s economy. Change strategies and intervention 
processes will be studied so students can apply practical solutions to various organizational challenges in 


case histories and in their own workplaces. Leadership and teamwork will be explored in the context of 
organizational development. Three hours. 
GOL 4350 Strategic Enterprise 
This course will take us into a company boardroom. We will look together on how a company can move 
with a purpose together to achieve a desired outcome; that is Strategic Enterprise! During these five 
weeks we will deep dive from the initial boardroom desires to implementation by the organization. How 
does a business or company compete in the marketplace with or without a strategic plan? We will look 
at various aspects of a strategic planning as it relates to mission, vision, communication plan, desired 
outcomes, business competitive advantages, people impact, to name a few. We will look at public 
companies, discuss our own experience, and for our capstone project, pull together a full Strategic Plan 
together in a presentation format. So, put your thinking caps on, grab a chair in the boardroom, and let’s 
dig in! Three hours.  
GOL 4380 Global Perspectives 
In this course, students engage divergent outlooks from around the world, grappling with cultural 
differences and presuppositions. Defining literary works, films and guest speakers from different 
continents set the stage for literary and cultural discussions. This course will also provide a framework 
for understanding God’s heart for the nations. Three hours.  
GOL 4400 Operations Management  
Students will learn how to use mathematics, statistics, and various computer packages to solve common 
business problems. Three hours. 
GOL 4420 Intervention Strategies and Technique 
Students will learn the fundamentals of identifying problems of clients and formulating creative 
solutions by networking with available resources, becoming a liaison with the community, and utilizing 
secular and faith-based organizations to assist with emotional, financial, social and spiritual needs. There 
will be an emphasis on understanding the philosophical/biblical foundation of human service helping 
and on practically applying these principles in creating change strategies. Three hours. 
GOL 4520 Interpersonal Communication and Interviewing Skills 
This course provides knowledge of theory and practice in interpersonal communication, which is vital to 
interpersonal experience within multiple contexts, both personal and professional. Course content will 
focus on skills related to verbal and nonverbal communication important for establishing positive 
rapport, understanding and applying one's own style of relating, resolving conflict, and assisting clients 
in clarifying goals and desired outcomes. It will also include appraisal of current cultural factors on 
interpersonal communication. 
GOL 4600 Applied Research 
This course introduces the student to specific research terminology and research fundamentals such as 
design, samplings, surveys, experiments, focus groups, and other qualitative & quantitative approaches, 
culminating in a student research project. Three hours. 
GOL 4620 Legal, Professional, and Ethical Issues in Human Services 
This course will provide an overview of major ethical and legal issues in the delivery of human services. 
The roles, functions, and legal and ethical responsibilities of the human service worker will also be 
investigated.  The course will help students reflect on their own personal and professional values and 


how those impact their practice.  Students will be able to analyze and develop a framework, which will 
serve as a foundation in addressing legal and ethical dilemmas in their practice in human services. Three 
hours. 
 
GOL 4650 Personal Resource Management 
This course is designed to equip students to explore the fundamentals of stewarding the resources God 
has given, specifically time, talent, and treasure.  The course includes an overview of budgeting, saving, 
investing, healthcare/insurance, staying out of debt, and what the Bible says about these topics.  
Students will complete a personal action plan for how they will most effectively steward their time, 
talents and treasure. Three hours. 
 
GOL 4700 Senior Seminar 
This culmination experience will enable students to select individualized activities that demonstrate 
their practical managerial skills in the workplace. Three hours. 
 

 
 
 
BUS 5100 Business Ethics 
Biblical Business. Understanding business from a distinctly biblical perspective. This course provides 
learners with the opportunity to develop and apply a biblical ethic to business.  As they complete this 
course learners will develop the capacity to understand business from a distinctly biblical perspective 
and to act on that understanding.  Three credit hours. 
 
BUS 5110 Managerial Economics 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to understand particular business organizations and 
their environments from both an economic and a biblical perspective.  As they complete this course 
learners will develop the capacity to analyze particular business organizations and their environments 
from both an economic and a biblical perspective and to act on that analysis.  Three credit hours. 
BUS 5120 Human Resource Management 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to understand the effective use, development, and 
retention of human capital.  Both economic and biblical insights will be utilized in this process. Three 
credit hours. 
BUS 5130 Operations Management 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to develop an understanding of activity-based 
management, lean manufacturing and total quality management.  First, learners will develop the 
capacity to use activity-based management to understand processes within organizations.  Second, 
learners will develop the capacity to use lean manufacturing and total quality management to act on 
that understanding as they manage and improve processes within organizations.  Third, leaners will 
consider insights from Scripture concerning efficiency, productivity and quality.  Three credit hours. 
 
 
 

      

BUS 5140 Marketing Management 
This course is designed to provide the learner with an understanding of the complexities of decision 
making in the realm of managing the marketing function in an ever-changing environment.  Analysis will 
be conducted on issues related to marketing strategy, customer relations, product development, pricing, 
distribution, promotion and ethical issues.  Case analysis will be used toward application of conceptual 
knowledge and the formation of a systematic way of analyzing and determining appropriately ethical 
decisions for complex real-word issues.  Three credit hours. 
BUS 5160 Strategic Leadership  
This course introduces the key concepts, tools, and principles of strategy formation and competitive 
analysis.  It is concerned with managerial preparation, decisions, and actions that affect the 
performance of organizations.  The course is focused on information, analyses, skills, and the business 
judgement leaders use to maximize long-term potential in the reality of a changing world. Three credit 
hours. 
 
BUS 5200 Financial Management 
Using financial information effectively. Understanding and acting on the information in financial 
statements and other accounting reports. 
 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to develop and act on an understanding of finance.  
In pursuit of these goals, learner activities focus on four key concepts:  1) the realized return of external 
investors is directly related to the realized outcome of internal management decisions and activities,  2) 
organizations use financial statements to summarize the realized outcomes of management decisions 
and activities and to communicate that information to investors and other external parties, 3) the 
financial accounting model depicts how the individual financial statements fit together and allows 
managers, investors and other interested parties to fully access the information contained in those 
statements, and 4) risk is inherent in economic activity so the expected return from any activity must 
sufficiently compensate for assuming the related risk.  In the course learners also explore how to 
evaluate financial information on organizational activities using insights from Scripture.  Three credit 
hours. 
BUS 5210 International Business 
Navigating the international landscape. Factors requiring special attention when firms cross national 
boundaries. 
 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to develop an understanding of the international 
landscape.  Acting on that understanding, learners then develop the capacity to formulate plans that 
allow businesses to effectively navigate the international landscape.  The international landscape will be 
viewed from trade, productivity, monetary and biblical perspectives.  Three credit hours. 
BUS 5220 Legal Environment of Business 
This course deals with basic legal principles, which control modern business transactions. Such topics to 
be covered will be contracts, employment law, intellectual property, torts, corporate structures, and 
international issues relating to those topics. Three credit hours.  

BUS 5230 Entrepreneurship 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to develop an understanding of entrepreneurship, 
focusing on its visionary, creative, and risk-taking dimensions.  On the visionary dimension, learners will 
understand that products, services and processes must first be imagined before they can be created. On 
the creative dimension, learners will understand that the vison of a product, service or process to a 
reality is an uncertain, risky proposition with no guarantee of technical or financial success.  From the 
perspective of Scripture, learners will consider how the entrepreneurial capacity present in humans 
evidences their creation in the image of the ultimate Creator. Three credit hours. 
BUS 5240 Business Policy 
 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to understand organizations from a comparative 
advantage based strategic perspective.  Consistent with that understanding learners develop the 
capacity to formulate and implement strategies that capitalize on and further develop an organization’s 
comparative advantage.  This process of capitalizing on and further developing an organization’s 
comparative advantage will be evaluated using the concept of stewardship found in Scripture.  Three 
credit hours. 
 
BUS 5260 Managerial Statistics 
Students will apply statistical and quantitative approaches to solving business problems.  Coverage 
includes probability, descriptive statistics, normal distributions and Z-scores, histograms, correlations 
and regression.  Three credit hours. 
 
MHE 5010 History and Foundations of Higher Education 
This course is designed to introduce students to how the institution of higher education has been 
shaped by major trends in American society. It will examine the historic development, structure, roles, 
and diverse characteristics of both private and public sectors of higher education, how they have 
contributed to the development of our country, and what might be expected of higher education in the 
future.  Additional focus will be given to Christian heritage and its centrality in the development of 
higher education. Three hours. 

 
 
MHE 5020 Student Affairs in Higher Education 
This course is an in-depth study of theory and developmental patterns which are necessary in guiding 
the student affairs professional.  Content is designed to increase the understanding of how student 
services, activities, health and wellness, and all areas of student affairs are organized, administered, and 
assessed. Three hours. 
MHE 5030 Organization, Governance and Finance 
This course examines key administrative and financing structures used within higher educational 
institutions. This will include budgeting processes, sources of revenue, types of expenditures, and 
analyzing social, political, economic, and technological environments.  Additional focus will be given to 
factors influencing strategic level decision making, structure, governance model, human resources, 
change management and leadership culture. Three hours. 
MHE 5040 The College Student   
This course examines the different ways students view, encounter, and react to the college or university 
environment.  MSHE students taking this course will learn distinctives and differences in several 
different areas that affect the college student, including generational cohorts, ethnic backgrounds, 
sexual orientation, and religious belief. Three hours. 
MHE 5050 Legal Issues in Higher Education   
This course focuses on persistent legal and ethical issues which confront today’s leaders in higher 
education. You will learn to recognize concerns while processing and analyzing law in areas such as 
student rights and privacy laws, sexual harassment, tort liability, federal, and judicial reputations, 
distinction between public and private sectors, all the while learning and understanding the need for 
clear judicial affairs policy. Three hours. 
MHE 5060 Integrative Application Project 1  
This course provides learners with the opportunity to further develop the capacity to properly and 
effectively use concepts from courses completed during the first year of the MSHE program in realistic 
problem-solving settings. Students will demonstrate mastery of first year material by using that material 
to analyze and address an existing problem or question.  Proper and effective use of these concepts 
includes:  1) use of individual concepts and 2) use of multiple concepts in an interdisciplinary manner.  
Properly addressing realistic problems includes:  1) specifying the problem, 2) analyzing the problem, 
and 3) formulating a solution to the problem. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5070 Integrative Application Project 2  
This course provides learners with the opportunity to further develop the capacity to properly and 
effectively use concepts from courses completed during the first year of the MSHE program in realistic 
problem-solving settings. Students will demonstrate mastery of second year material by using that 
material to analyze and address an existing problem or question.  Proper and effective use of these 
concepts includes:  1) use of individual concepts and 2) use of multiple concepts in an interdisciplinary 
manner.  Properly addressing realistic problems includes:  1) specifying the problem, 2) analyzing the 
problem, and 3) formulating a solution to the problem. Three hours. 
 
 

MHE 5080 Research Methods  
This course offers an introductory study of the principles and techniques of investigation and data 
collection in the field of higher education. The course will deal with techniques of organizing, 
conducting, analyzing, and presenting such data, with a focus on how such activities apply within the 
realm of a higher education professional. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5090 Leadership in Higher Education 
Students will engage a variety of leadership theories, models and organizational frameworks and then 
apply those theories, models, and structure to leading within the field of higher education. Because 
leadership in higher education is inherently organizational and undergoing tremendous change, a large 
portion of the course will be devoted to navigating change within organizational structures and utilizing 
the strengths of institutions. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5100 Grant Writing for Foundations and Corporations  
This course will focus on identifying private foundations and corporations whose philanthropic mission 
aligns with the vision a non-profit organization chosen by the student. Students will conduct research on 
foundations and corporations and craft letters of inquiry and grant proposals. Students will develop a 
basic knowledge of grant writing process and display understanding of the content through the 
development of a grant proposal. (cross listed as NPM 5090) 
 
MHE 5120 Philanthropy & Fundraising Fundamentals 
This course provides an overview of the history and theories influencing philanthropy. Students will 
develop their own theoretical framework for fundraising. The culminating project will be the creation 
and presentation of a case statement for a non-profit organization of student's choice. (cross listed as 
NPM 5100) 
MHE 5010 History and Foundations of Higher Education 
This course is designed to introduce students to how the institution of higher education has been 
shaped by major trends in American society. It will examine the historic development, structure, roles, 
and diverse characteristics of both private and public sectors of higher education, how they have 
contributed to the development of our country, and what might be expected of higher education in the 
future.  Additional focus will be given to Christian heritage and its centrality in the development of 
higher education. Three hours. 

 
 
MHE 5020 Student Affairs in Higher Education 
This course is an in-depth study of theory and developmental patterns which are necessary in guiding 
the student affairs professional.  Content is designed to increase the understanding of how student 
services, activities, health and wellness, and all areas of student affairs are organized, administered, and 
assessed. Three hours. 
MHE 5030 Organization, Governance and Finance 
This course examines key administrative and financing structures used within higher educational 
institutions. This will include budgeting processes, sources of revenue, types of expenditures, and 
analyzing social, political, economic, and technological environments.  Additional focus will be given to 
factors influencing strategic level decision making, structure, governance model, human resources, 
change management and leadership culture. Three hours. 
MHE 5040 The College Student   
This course examines the different ways students view, encounter, and react to the college or university 
environment.  MSHE students taking this course will learn distinctives and differences in several 
different areas that affect the college student, including generational cohorts, ethnic backgrounds, 
sexual orientation, and religious belief. Three hours. 
MHE 5050 Legal Issues in Higher Education   
This course focuses on persistent legal and ethical issues which confront today’s leaders in higher 
education. You will learn to recognize concerns while processing and analyzing law in areas such as 
student rights and privacy laws, sexual harassment, tort liability, federal, and judicial reputations, 
distinction between public and private sectors, all the while learning and understanding the need for 
clear judicial affairs policy. Three hours. 
MHE 5060 Integrative Application Project 1  
This course provides learners with the opportunity to further develop the capacity to properly and 
effectively use concepts from courses completed during the first year of the MSHE program in realistic 
problem-solving settings. Students will demonstrate mastery of first year material by using that material 
to analyze and address an existing problem or question.  Proper and effective use of these concepts 
includes:  1) use of individual concepts and 2) use of multiple concepts in an interdisciplinary manner.  
Properly addressing realistic problems includes:  1) specifying the problem, 2) analyzing the problem, 
and 3) formulating a solution to the problem. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5070 Integrative Application Project 2  
This course provides learners with the opportunity to further develop the capacity to properly and 
effectively use concepts from courses completed during the first year of the MSHE program in realistic 
problem-solving settings. Students will demonstrate mastery of second year material by using that 
material to analyze and address an existing problem or question.  Proper and effective use of these 
concepts includes:  1) use of individual concepts and 2) use of multiple concepts in an interdisciplinary 
manner.  Properly addressing realistic problems includes:  1) specifying the problem, 2) analyzing the 
problem, and 3) formulating a solution to the problem. Three hours. 
 
 

MHE 5080 Research Methods  
This course offers an introductory study of the principles and techniques of investigation and data 
collection in the field of higher education. The course will deal with techniques of organizing, 
conducting, analyzing, and presenting such data, with a focus on how such activities apply within the 
realm of a higher education professional. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5090 Leadership in Higher Education 
Students will engage a variety of leadership theories, models and organizational frameworks and then 
apply those theories, models, and structure to leading within the field of higher education. Because 
leadership in higher education is inherently organizational and undergoing tremendous change, a large 
portion of the course will be devoted to navigating change within organizational structures and utilizing 
the strengths of institutions. Three hours. 
 
MHE 5100 Grant Writing for Foundations and Corporations  
This course will focus on identifying private foundations and corporations whose philanthropic mission 
aligns with the vision a non-profit organization chosen by the student. Students will conduct research on 
foundations and corporations and craft letters of inquiry and grant proposals. Students will develop a 
basic knowledge of grant writing process and display understanding of the content through the 
development of a grant proposal. (cross listed as NPM 5090) 
 
MHE 5120 Philanthropy & Fundraising Fundamentals 
This course provides an overview of the history and theories influencing philanthropy. Students will 
develop their own theoretical framework for fundraising. The culminating project will be the creation 
and presentation of a case statement for a non-profit organization of student's choice. (cross listed as 
NPM 5100) 
 
 
NPM 5015 Nonprofit Management as a Career 
People view nonprofits from different perspectives, some considering them to be social institutions and 
others considering them to be more like business firms with a social purpose. This course attempts to 
blend these perspectives and to provide a balanced overview of the field. 
Although some people portray nonprofits as less well-managed than businesses, that perspective is 
often inaccurate. This course will encourage students preparing for careers in nonprofit management to 
proceed with pride and confidence that their field is as distinguished as management in business or 
government.  Together we will thoroughly pursue an understanding of how a nonprofit management 
career brings challenges but also rewards. 
 
NPM 5010 Foundations of Nonprofit Management 
This course will provide an orientation to the nonprofit sector and a theoretical foundation for the more 
applied topics that will be covered later in MSNM Program. Students will begin to develop their personal 
philosophies of management as it applies to the unique environment of the nonprofits. This course 
seeks to engender an overview of nonprofit management that is both conceptual and practical in 
nature.  Three hours. 
NPM 5020 Governing and Leading Nonprofit Organizations 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to learn the many dynamics involved in leading an 
organization under the auspices of a governing board. Best practice strategies and activities will be 
utilized regarding effective and ethical leadership, managing an organization, and recruiting, developing, 
evaluating and retaining human capital within the organization.  Three hours. 
NPM 5030 Obtaining and Managing Resources for Nonprofit Organizations 
Introduces students to the major financial management concepts and techniques required for effective 
management of nonprofit organizations. Offers students an opportunity to learn about nonprofit 
accounting, budget management, cash flow management, financial statements and reports. 
 
NPM 5040 Managing the Nonprofit Organization 
Nonprofit organizations can thrive only when there is a clear understanding of the internal and external 
realities that impact a company’s present status and potential for growth. This course will examine 
various ways to ensure accountability to external stakeholders and effectively measure performance. 
The strategic planning process will also be examined in depth, and students will learn how to utilize 
planning skills in a practical exercise with a company of their choice. Students will also examine ways to 
help nonprofit companies build capacity and explore opportunities for collaboration.  Three hours. 
NPM 5050 Marketing, Communication and Special Topics for Nonprofit Organizations 
This course is a guide through four topics that can easily be confusing or too new for nonprofit leaders 
to handle without help. 1) Leaders, must know the values and pitfalls of marketing so that the mission 
remains the primary focus. 2) Advocacy includes education of the public in addition to the challenging 
topic of lobbying that few nonprofits engage in with confidence. 3) Globalization affects many local 
nonprofits as there may be chapters abroad. Leaders must be aware of the management and board 
'best practices' that come from globalized nonprofits. 4) Social entrepreneurship is a newer topic that 
covers innovation to provide new income streams for a target population, social impact or both. 
Business for missions, community development, and micro finance are related topics.  Three hours. 
 
NPM 5065 Nonprofit Management Analysis I 
This course allows the learner to demonstrate their capacity for understanding and applying the first 
year of the nonprofit management course work.  Learners will examine and contrast a current and 
relevant nonprofit management issue, then compose and construct a strategic, viable, credible, and 
synergistic solution to such an issue.  Three hours.  Prerequisites: NPM 5010, NPM 5020, and two (2) 
graduate elective courses in year one.   
NPM 5075 Nonprofit Management Analysis II 
This course allows the learner to demonstrate their capacity for understanding and applying the second 
year of the nonprofit management course work.  Learners will examine and contrast a current and 
relevant nonprofit management issue, then compose and construct a strategic, viable, credible, and 
synergistic solution to such an issue.  Three hours.  Prerequisites: NPM 5040, NPM 5050, and two (2) 
graduate elective courses in year two.  
 
NPM 5080 Finances for Nonprofit Organizations 
Nonprofit management is becoming a recognized specialty, and there is a growing number of individuals 
and entities specializing in nonprofit financial management as well. With this growth in numbers comes 
a comparable growth in the demand for sophisticated management. No longer is it enough just for one's 
financial records to be in order; one must be able to demonstrate good financial systems to meet all the 
other rising demands on today's nonprofit. That will be our main focus. (cross listed as MHE 5110) 
 
NPM 5090 Grant Writing for Foundations and Corporations  
This course will focus on identifying private foundations and corporations whose philanthropic mission 
aligns with the vision a non-profit organization chosen by the student. Students will conduct research on 
foundations and corporations and craft letters of inquiry and grant proposals. Students will develop a 
basic knowledge of grant writing process and display understanding of the content through the 
development of a grant proposal. (cross listed as MHE 5100) 
 
NPM 5100 Philanthropy & Fundraising Fundamentals 
This course provides an overview of the history and theories influencing philanthropy. Students will 
develop their own theoretical framework for fundraising. The culminating project will be the creation 
and presentation of a case statement for a non-profit organization of student's choice. (cross listed as 
MHE 5120) 
 
NPM 5015 Nonprofit Management as a Career 
People view nonprofits from different perspectives, some considering them to be social institutions and 
others considering them to be more like business firms with a social purpose. This course attempts to 
blend these perspectives and to provide a balanced overview of the field. 
Although some people portray nonprofits as less well-managed than businesses, that perspective is 
often inaccurate. This course will encourage students preparing for careers in nonprofit management to 
proceed with pride and confidence that their field is as distinguished as management in business or 
government.  Together we will thoroughly pursue an understanding of how a nonprofit management 
career brings challenges but also rewards. 
 
NPM 5010 Foundations of Nonprofit Management 
This course will provide an orientation to the nonprofit sector and a theoretical foundation for the more 
applied topics that will be covered later in MSNM Program. Students will begin to develop their personal 
philosophies of management as it applies to the unique environment of the nonprofits. This course 
seeks to engender an overview of nonprofit management that is both conceptual and practical in 
nature.  Three hours. 
NPM 5020 Governing and Leading Nonprofit Organizations 
This course provides learners with the opportunity to learn the many dynamics involved in leading an 
organization under the auspices of a governing board. Best practice strategies and activities will be 
utilized regarding effective and ethical leadership, managing an organization, and recruiting, developing, 
evaluating and retaining human capital within the organization.  Three hours. 
NPM 5030 Obtaining and Managing Resources for Nonprofit Organizations 
Introduces students to the major financial management concepts and techniques required for effective 
management of nonprofit organizations. Offers students an opportunity to learn about nonprofit 
accounting, budget management, cash flow management, financial statements and reports. 
 
NPM 5040 Managing the Nonprofit Organization 
Nonprofit organizations can thrive only when there is a clear understanding of the internal and external 
realities that impact a company’s present status and potential for growth. This course will examine 
various ways to ensure accountability to external stakeholders and effectively measure performance. 
The strategic planning process will also be examined in depth, and students will learn how to utilize 
planning skills in a practical exercise with a company of their choice. Students will also examine ways to 
help nonprofit companies build capacity and explore opportunities for collaboration.  Three hours. 
NPM 5050 Marketing, Communication and Special Topics for Nonprofit Organizations 
This course is a guide through four topics that can easily be confusing or too new for nonprofit leaders 
to handle without help. 1) Leaders, must know the values and pitfalls of marketing so that the mission 
remains the primary focus. 2) Advocacy includes education of the public in addition to the challenging 
topic of lobbying that few nonprofits engage in with confidence. 3) Globalization affects many local 
nonprofits as there may be chapters abroad. Leaders must be aware of the management and board 
'best practices' that come from globalized nonprofits. 4) Social entrepreneurship is a newer topic that 
covers innovation to provide new income streams for a target population, social impact or both. 
Business for missions, community development, and micro finance are related topics.  Three hours. 
 
NPM 5065 Nonprofit Management Analysis I 
This course allows the learner to demonstrate their capacity for understanding and applying the first 
year of the nonprofit management course work.  Learners will examine and contrast a current and 
relevant nonprofit management issue, then compose and construct a strategic, viable, credible, and 
synergistic solution to such an issue.  Three hours.  Prerequisites: NPM 5010, NPM 5020, and two (2) 
graduate elective courses in year one.   
NPM 5075 Nonprofit Management Analysis II 
This course allows the learner to demonstrate their capacity for understanding and applying the second 
year of the nonprofit management course work.  Learners will examine and contrast a current and 
relevant nonprofit management issue, then compose and construct a strategic, viable, credible, and 
synergistic solution to such an issue.  Three hours.  Prerequisites: NPM 5040, NPM 5050, and two (2) 
graduate elective courses in year two.  
 
NPM 5080 Finances for Nonprofit Organizations 
Nonprofit management is becoming a recognized specialty, and there is a growing number of individuals 
and entities specializing in nonprofit financial management as well. With this growth in numbers comes 
a comparable growth in the demand for sophisticated management. No longer is it enough just for one's 
financial records to be in order; one must be able to demonstrate good financial systems to meet all the 
other rising demands on today's nonprofit. That will be our main focus. (cross listed as MHE 5110) 
 
NPM 5090 Grant Writing for Foundations and Corporations  
This course will focus on identifying private foundations and corporations whose philanthropic mission 
aligns with the vision a non-profit organization chosen by the student. Students will conduct research on 
foundations and corporations and craft letters of inquiry and grant proposals. Students will develop a 
basic knowledge of grant writing process and display understanding of the content through the 
development of a grant proposal. (cross listed as MHE 5100) 
 
NPM 5100 Philanthropy & Fundraising Fundamentals 
This course provides an overview of the history and theories influencing philanthropy. Students will 
develop their own theoretical framework for fundraising. The culminating project will be the creation 
and presentation of a case statement for a non-profit organization of student's choice. (cross listed as 
MHE 5120) 