ACCT 1123  College Accounting Procedures (3-0-3)
Sole proprietorship and corporation accounting procedures 
for both service and merchandising concerns, including 
the fundamental procedures for double-entry accounting, 
the accounting cycle, preparation of financial statements, 
accrual versus cash basis accounting, depreciation, and 
inventory cost flows. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
ACCT 2091-4  Special Topics in Accounting (Variable)
This course is designed to meet accounting application 
requirements and skill enhancements in industry and personal 
use. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credit hours.
ACCT 2103  Financial Accounting (3-0-3)
An introduction to financial accounting concepts and 
principles, and the development of financial accounting 
information. The material is developed from the perspective 
of a user. Discussion will center on how users analyze and 
interpret financial information in the decision-making process. 
Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 1123 or equivalent. [Fa,Sp,Su]
ACCT 2191-3  Accounting Internship (Variable)
A supervised on-the-job training experience in an 
appropriate business, industry, government agency, 
or institution. Approved internships will meet part of the 
program requirements for the Associate in Applied Science 
degree. Prerequisites: ACCT 2103 and approval of Faculty 
Coordinator (or Accounting professor) and Accounting 
Chairperson. [Fa, Sp]
ACCT 2203  Managerial Accounting (3-0-3)
Introduction to managerial accounting. Emphasis on cost 
behavior and its uses for both short- and long-term decisions; 
including the concept of the budget and standards for 
planning and performance evaluation. Specific coverage 
includes manufacturing costs and control, cost behavior, 
profit planning, break-even analysis, and the decision-
making process. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 2103. 
[Fa,Sp,Su]
ACCT 2313  Intermediate Accounting I (3-0-3)
An in-depth study of the following: cash, investments, receivables, 
inventories, plant and equipment, and intangible assets. Lab fee 
$10. Prerequisite: ACCT 2203 or concurrent enrollment. [Fa]
ACCT 2323  Cost Accounting (3-0-3)
An in-depth study of basic cost principles, job order costing, 
process costing, accounting for materials, labor, and 
overhead costs. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 2203 or 
concurrent enrollment. [Sp]
ACCT 2333  Intermediate Accounting II (3-0-3)
An in-depth study of contingent and deferred liabilities, 
special activity affecting stockholders equity, and the 
preparation and analysis of the financial reports. Lab fee: 
$10. Prerequisite: ACCT 2313. [Sp]
ACCT 2403  Personal Income Tax (3-0-3)
A brief sketch of federal income tax with emphasis on 
completing individual income tax returns including gross 
income, deductions for and from adjusted gross income, and 
tax credits. Lab fee: $10. [Fa]
ACCT 2413  Small Business Income Tax (3-0-3)
An introduction to the requirements necessary to 
prepare federal income tax returns for small business, 
sole proprietorships, partnerships, S corporations, and 
corporations. Emphasis will be in the determination of the 
revenues, expenses, gross profit, and taxable income of 
small businesses and preparation and filing of the Federal 
Income Tax return. Lab fee: $10. [Sp]
ACCT 2503 Payroll Accounting (3-0-3)
The course provides an understanding of the laws that 
affect a company's payroll structure and practical application 
skills in maintaining payroll records. Topics include: payroll 
tax laws, payroll tax forms, payroll and personnel records, 
computing wages and salaries, taxes affecting employees 
and employers, and analyzing and journalizing payroll 
transactions. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 2103. [Fa]
ACCT 2603  QuickBooks® Accounting (3-0-3)
This course covers the input of accounting data into the 
computer using Intuit QuickBooks® accounting software. 
Emphasis is on how accounting software processes 
information to obtain output of financial statements and fiscal 
year reports. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 1123. [Sp, Su]
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
322

Accounting (ACCT), continued
Art (ART)
ACCT 2723  Professional Bookkeeping (3-0-3)
This course prepares students for the National Bookkeepers 
Association's Uniform Bookkeeper Certification Examination. 
The course covers the level of knowledge and skill needed 
to carry out all key functions through the adjusted trial 
balance, including basic payroll and accounting for sales and 
purchases. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: ACCT 1123. [Sp]
ACCT 2803  Excel® Accounting (3-0-3)
This course provides hands-on experience in accounting 
using Microsoft Excel®. The content includes creating data 
boxes in financial accounting, using multiple sheets with Excel 
formulas, preparing professional quality financial reports, 
creating graphs to interpret business results, and using 
Excel functions to evaluate accounting data. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisites: ACCT 2103 and CIT 1093 or equivalent. [Fa, Sp]
ART 1103  Art Appreciation (3-0-3)
A course designed to develop an awareness and appreciation 
of art through the study of art terms, artists, techniques, and 
cultures. May be taken as Humanities credit for General 
Education requirements. Open to non-art majors. Not open 
to art majors for elective credit.
ART 1113  Photography I (2-2-3)
Basic principles of photography. Includes instruction in 
camera controls, exposure controls, films, filters, flash, and 
composition. Lab includes instruction in the development 
and printing of black and white film. A fully adjustable 35mm 
camera is required. Lab fee: $15.
ART 1213  Drawing I (2-2-3)
A drawing course required for all majors and those students 
desiring concentrated drawing experiences in various 
problems to depict basic forms through natural forms. Line 
drawing, sketching approaches, value rendering and pictorial 
organization are featured using several dry drawing mediums. 
Lab fee: $15.
ART 1223  Drawing II (2-2-3)
A continuation of ART 1213 with further study of various types 
of subject matter with emphasis on dry and wet mediums, 
expansion of pictorial composition approaches to further 
develop traditional and personal expression in drawing. 
Required for all art majors and may be taken by the student 
interested in more drawing. Prerequisite: ART 1213 or equivalent. 
Lab fee: $15. This class is only offered in the spring semester.
ART 1313  Fundamentals of Art (2-2-3)
This course will cover problems in 2-dimensional pictorial 
composition emphasizing the use of the basic elements: line, 
shape, space, texture, value, etc., and understanding and 
use of the basic principles: unity, balance, rhythm, contrast, 
emphasis, repetition, etc. A variety of mediums will be used 
to explore the use of these formal issues of arrangement 
and composition. Art, Graphic Design, Photography majors’ 
requirement.  Lab fee: $15.
ART 1323  Color I (2-2-3)
Color I is a study of color theories and perception and the 
application of color principles to a variety of design problems. 
Color mixing, composition, color harmonies, and rendering 
techniques through a variety of materials and mediums will 
be addressed. Knowledge of basic drawing and design is 
assumed. Required for all art majors.  Lab fee: $15.  In the fall 
semester, this class is offered in the evening; in the spring, it 
is offered in the daytime.
ART 2093  Special Topics in Art (3-0-3)
This course provides the individual or group as designated 
by the professor opportunity to pursue topics considered 
advanced study beyond those presented in regular required 
and recommended elective courses in art. May be repeated 
with change of content. Maximum credit up to 12 hours is 
allowed. Offered as professor’s schedule permits. Basic 
knowledge is assumed. Student must meet with the professor 
within the first week of the semester.
ART 2123  Photography II (2-2-3)
Study of the use of various developers and films for 
unusual effects. Includes instruction in enlarger controls, 
print retouching, and print mounting. A fully adjustable 
35mm camera is required. Course focuses on black and 
white photography. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: ART 1113 or 
equivalent.  This class is only offered in the spring semester.
ART 2413 Survey of Art, Technology, & Culture (3-0-3)
Survey of Art, Technology, and Culture supplies students with 
an overview of a variety of contemporary art and new media 
practices as they intersect with uses of technology including 
3D printing, digital video and photography, virtual art, and 
microcomputers. Students receive instruction in artistic themes 
and methods including considerations of linear and non-
linear time, site specificity, intersections of art and science, 
installation art, and ephemeral works. Students produce 
projects using the ideas and techniques addressed through 
class lectures and demonstrations. Prerequisite: ART 1313. This 
class is only offered in the fall semester.
ART 2513  Painting I (2-2-3)
Composition and fundamentals of painting with acrylics and/
or oils. Emphasis on awareness of contemporary approaches 
to techniques and styles with application of the elements of 
art. Strengthen and enhance individual student expression 
and visual problem-solving skills. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: 
ART 1213 and ART 1323, or equivalent.
ART 2523  Painting II (2-2-3)
A continuation of ART 2513 with emphasis on contemporary 
approaches in techniques and styles working in acrylic and 
oil paints. Knowledge of basic drawing and design assumed. 
A continued use of the elements of art and the principles of 
design. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: ART 2513 or equivalent.
ART 2713 Independent Studies in Art (3-0-3)
This course provides the individual or group as designated 
by the professor opportunity to pursue topics considered 
advanced study beyond those presented in regular required 
and recommended elective courses in art. May be repeated 
with change of content. Maximum credit up to 12 hours is 
allowed. Offered as professor’s schedule permits. Basic 
knowledge is assumed. Student must meet with the professor 
within the first week of the semester. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
323

Astronomy (ASTR)
Art (ART), continued
Aviation (AVI)
ART 2813  Survey of Art History I (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the arts, artists, and their cultures 
from Prehistoric through the 14th century through various 
parts of the world. Required for art majors. Open to any 
interested students. Approved as Humanities credit for 
General Education requirements.
ART 2823 Survey of Art History II (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the visual arts, artists, and cultures 
from the 14th century to the 21st Century through out 
various parts of the world. Required for art majors. Open to 
any interested student. Approved as Humanities credit for 
General Education requirements.
ART 2893  Ceramics I (2-2-3)
An introductory course in hand-building methods, surface 
decoration, glazing, and firing in the production of ceramic 
objects. Basic wheel throwing will be reviewed. This course is 
highly recommended for art majors desiring a 3-dimensional 
art emphasis. Offers all students the opportunity to experience 
the discipline of craft and to explore the creative and 
expressive potential of the ceramic medium. Lab fee: $15.
 
ART 2902  Art Capstone (0-2-2)
This course evaluates a student’s understanding and 
application of basic art foundation concepts and design 
principles. The student will be required to apply basic art 
foundation principles learned from required program courses 
to the development and completion of a serial project that 
will be developed under the guidance and direction of 
appropriate faculty. This project will act as an assessment 
tool to evaluate a student’s basic art knowledge and skills 
as well as technique. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: ART 1313 
and either ART 2813 or 2823; and 6 hours of Program 
Requirements.
ART 2912  Photography Capstone (0-2-2) 
This course evaluates a student's understanding and 
application of basic technical and design principles of the 
photographic medium. The student will be required to 
apply technical and design principles learned from required 
program courses to the completion of a serial project 
developed under the guidance and direction of appropriate 
faculty. This project will act as an assessment tool to evaluate 
the student's basic photographic skills and knowledge as 
well as application. Prerequisites: ART 1113, ART 2123, and 6 
hours of Program Requirements.
ASTR 1401  Astronomy Lab (0-0-1)
An elementary introduction to experimental and observational 
techniques in astronomy, utilizing computer simulations, 
naked-eye observations, telescopes, and graphing/
measurement techniques. Lab exercises will be performed 
both during the day and night, with opportunities for nighttime 
observations at an observatory. Prerequisite: ASTR 1424 or 
ASTR 1713 or ASTR 1723, or concurrent enrollment.
ASTR 1424  Elementary Astronomy (4-0-4)
The history, principles, and techniques of astronomy will be 
explored as they relate to the scientific method. Contemporary 
areas of interest are also explored to demonstrate the 
progression of science. General education course for non-
science majors to fulfill 4 hours Physical Science requirement. 
Prerequisite: Eligible to enroll in a college-level math course.
ASTR 1713  Solar System Astronomy (3-0-3)
An overview of human knowledge, including recent 
discoveries, regarding our solar system and motions within 
the sky. In-depth investigations into the tools of astronomy; 
nature of light; formation of our solar system as well as 
physical characteristics of solar system bodies; including: 
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, 
Pluto and minor solar system constituents such as satellites, 
comets, asteroids and meteoroids. Prerequisite: MATH 1513 
or concurrent enrollment.
ASTR 1723  Stellar & Galactic Astronomy (3-0-3)
An overview of human knowledge, including recent 
discoveries, regarding stars, galaxies and the universe. 
In-depth investigations into the tools of astronomy; nature 
of light; star formation; structure and evolution of the Sun 
and stars; stellar remnants (white dwarfs, neutron stars and 
black holes); galactic formation; dark matter; galactic clusters; 
Hubble’s Law; the Big Bang and the large scale structure 
and evolution of the universe. Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or 
concurrent enrollment.
AVI 1011  Flight Safety (1-0-1)
Student studies material necessary for safe conduct of 
flight, emergency preparedness, and survival of emergency 
landings.
AVI 1014  Private Pilot Ground School (4-0-4)
The student studies aerodynamics, flight instruments, 
navigation, meteorology, weight and balance, and physiology 
as the topics relate to obtaining a Federal Aviation 
Administration private pilot license. Students may take the 
FAA Private Pilot written knowledge exam upon completion 
of this course.
AVI 1025  Private Pilot Flight Training (2-6-5)
This flight training course is in accordance with Part 61 of the 
Federal Aviation Regulations. Dual instruction and supervised 
solo flight practice are conducted by professors certified by 
the Federal Aviation Administration. Students may elect 
to make their own arrangements for training aircraft and 
instruction; or for a special fee, Rose State College will select 
an approved vendor who will provide the required training. 
Training provided through Rose State College will include 
25 hours dual, 20 hours solo, and 1.5 hours for FAA Flight 
Exam (46 1/2 hours total). All expenses beyond the above 
flight and instructional times must be borne by the student. 
Prerequisites: AVI 1014 or concurrent enrollment, FAA Class 
III Aviation Medical Certificate and permission of professor.
AVI 1134  Commercial Pilot Flight Training I (2-4-4)
This flight training course is in accordance with Part 61 of the 
Federal Aviation Regulations. This is approximately half of the 
flight training required to prepare a pilot to take the Federal 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
324

Aviation (AVI), continued
Aviation Administration flight test for the Commercial Pilot-
Airplane (Single-Engine Land) Rating. This course, followed 
by AVI 2332, is an integral package of training leading to 
the Commercial Pilot-Airplane (Single-Engine Land) Rating. 
Students may elect to make their own arrangements for all 
of this package; or, for a special fee, Rose State College will 
select an approved vendor who will provide the required 
training and flight testing for the entire integrated package. 
Students may not elect to have Rose State College provide 
only a part of this 2-course package. All expenses beyond 
the above flight and instructional times must be borne by the 
student. Prerequisites: AVI 1025 or concurrent enrollment 
and FAA Class II Medical Certificate.
AVI 1313  Introduction to UAS Operations (3-0-3)
This course provides an introduction to small unmanned 
aircraft system (sUAS) operations with an emphasis on civil 
applications.  Students explore safety considerations, sUAS 
components and functions, regulatory requirements, weather 
considerations, mission planning, operational considerations, 
photography, and videography basics, and photogrammetry 
(mapping).  The course also prepares students to take the 
FAA Unmanned Aircraft General (UAG) Knowledge Test and 
earn their Remote Pilot (Part 107) Certificate.  As the FAA sets 
minimum eligibility requirements for this certificate, students 
of this class must be at least 16 years old; be able to read, 
speak, write, and understand English; and be in a physical 
and mental condition to safely fly a drone.
AVI 2033  Aviation Law (3-0-3)
A study of the development of aviation law, through 
enactment of laws and judicial decisions applying those 
laws. Responsibilities and liabilities of public and private air 
carriers. Local, federal, and international laws forming the 
present legal structure and possible future changes.
AVI 2091-6  Special Topics in Aviation (Variable)
A directed individual or class study of special topics in 
aviation. May be repeated twice with different topics Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of professor required.
AVI 2123  Aviation History (3-0-3)
This course chronicles the history of aviation through 
an in-depth study of powered flight and focus on the 
development of civil, commercial, and military aviation. 
Covers significant events and people throughout aviation 
history from the first powered flight through present day 
developments and a brief look into the future.  Also examines 
the impact of aviation on recreation, transportation, warfare, 
and exploration.  This course is cross-listed with HIST 2123.
AVI 2134  Aviation Management (3-2-4)
Business principles and practices applicable to the broad 
field of general aviation. Will include a brief overview of the 
development of the aviation industry and its management 
principles, functions, and practices as they relate to the 
smaller type of general aviation business. Will also include 
on-site observation and evaluation of fixed base operations 
to allow the student the opportunity to relate academic study 
to actual business practice. Prerequisite: MGMT 2103 or 
equivalent.
AVI 2233  Aircraft Powerplants & Related Systems (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide those wishing to become 
professional pilots an understanding of the theory and 
operating principles of reciprocating and gas-turbine engines 
and related systems used on power aircraft. This course is 
pilot-oriented; maintenance, testing, and inspection are not 
addressed. Prerequisite: AVI 1014 or equivalent.
AVI 2243  Commercial Pilot Ground School (3-0-3)
The student studies all pertinent material for, and is required to 
pass, the written exam for the Federal Aviation Administration 
Commercial Pilot Rating. Multi-engine land normal and 
emergency performance characteristics are presented and 
demonstrated in the flight simulator. Prerequisite: AVI 1014 or 
Federal Aviation Administration Private Pilot Certificate.
AVI 2332  Commercial Pilot Flight Training II (1-3-2)
This flight training course is in accordance with Part 61 of the 
Federal Aviation Regulations. This is the second half of an 
integrated flying package which prepares a pilot to take the 
Federal Aviation Administration flight test for the Commercial 
Pilot-Airplane (Single-Engine Land) Rating. Students may 
elect to make their own arrangements for all of the flight 
training in courses AVI 1134 and AVI 2332; or, for a special fee, 
Rose State College will select an approved vendor who will 
provide the required training and flight testing for the entire 
integrated package. Students may not elect to have Rose 
State College provide only a part of this 2-course package. 
All expenses beyond the above flight and instructional times 
must be borne by the student. Prerequisites: AVI 1134, AVI 
2243, AVI 2433, and AVI 2233 or concurrent enrollment, and 
FAA Class II Aviation Medical Certificate.
AVI 2414  Instrument Pilot Ground School (4-0-4)
The student studies instrument procedures, en route 
structure, approach charts, weather and flight planning for 
Federal Aviation Administration instrument flight, and may 
take the written knowledge exam for the FAA Instrument 
Rating upon completion of course. Prerequisite: AVI 1014 or 
FAA Private Pilot Certificate (minimum).
AVI 2424  Basic Instrument Flight Simulation (3-2-4)
This course provides the VFR qualified pilot with the 
knowledge and practice in fundamental aircraft control and 
navigation, solely by reference to the aircraft's instrumentation. 
Classroom lectures, individual tutoring, 12 hours dual simulator 
instruction, and 16 hours of solo simulator practice provide a 
firm base for subsequent training in actual flight conditions.  
Prerequisites: Federal Aviation Administration Private Pilot 
Certificate and permission of AVI Coordinator.
AVI 2433  Navigation & Instrument Flight (3-0-3)
A study in flight preparation ranging from simple pilotage, 
dead-reckoning, etc., to advanced all-weather, high-altitude, 
and extended-range operations. Emphasis is placed on 
achieving optimum performance through the enlightened 
use of manufacturer's flight planning data and efficient route 
planning. Prerequisite: AVI 1014.
AVI 2442  Advanced Simulator (1-2-2)
This is a follow-up course to AVI 2424. It introduces instrument 
approaches to landing and all facets of instrument flight in 
the low altitude structure. Individual tutoring, 12 hours dual 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
325

Business Administration (BA)
Aviation (AVI), continued
simulator instruction and 16 hours solo simulator practice 
provide the student with Federal Aviation Administration-
approved instruction. Standards for completion are the same 
as for the instrument flight exam. Course may be repeated 
twice, once with concurrent enrollment in AVI 1134 or AVI 
2332 and once with concurrent enrollment in AVI 2443. 
Prerequisite: AVI 2424 or FAA Instrument Rating.
AVI 2443  Instrument Flight Training (1-4-3)
This flight training course is in accordance with Part 61 of 
the Federal Aviation Regulations. It presumes that the student 
will have satisfied 20 of the required 40 hours of dual flight 
instruction in the Rose State College instrument flight simulator 
courses. Therefore, the student who wishes Rose State 
College to provide the training, for a special fee, will receive 40 
hours solo cross-country flight time and 20 hours of dual flight 
instruction, plus 2.5 hours allotment for an Federal Aviation 
Administration flight test, and 10 hours of "solo" simulator time. 
Students may elect to obtain the required training, testing, and 
simulator time (as needed) from any authorized source without 
paying Rose State College any special fee. Prerequisites: AVI 
1025 or concurrent enrollment; FAA Class III Aviation Medical 
Certificate; and permission of professor.
AVI 2613  UAS Operations (3-0-3)
This course will examine all aspects of accidents/incidents 
involving airline and general aviation flights, including 
human factors, weather, aircraft crashworthiness, accident 
investigation, and aviation safety programs.  It examines 
those areas from the prespective of pilots, crew members, air 
traffic controllers and National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) findings.  Each accident/incident is studied with the 
goal of determining what went wrong and risk management 
lessons that can be learned in preventing future accident/
incidents.
AVI 2712  A/P General License (2-0-2)
This course prepares the student who has met appropriate 
experience requirements to take the Federal Aviation 
Administration Airframe/Powerplant General written exam. 
This course will also provide the pilot or airport manager 
foundation knowledge concerning the maintenance of aircraft 
and the governing FAA regulations. Students should contact 
the FAA Flight Standards District Office for an endorsement 
to take the written exam.
 
AVI 2714  A/P Airframe License (4-0-4)
This course covers the practices, procedures, materials, 
techniques and governing Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations that apply to the repair and maintenance of the 
airframe of an aircraft. This course prepares the student who 
has met appropriate experience requirements to take the 
FAA Airframe written exam. Students should contact FAA 
Flight Standards District Office for an endorsement to take 
the written exam.
AVI 2724  A/P Powerplant License (4-0-4)
This course covers the practices, procedures, materials, 
techniques, and governing Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations that apply to the repair and maintenance of aircraft 
engines (powerplants). This course prepares the student who 
has met appropriate experience requirements to take the 
FAA Powerplant written exam. Students should contact FAA 
Flight Standards District Office for an endorsement to take 
the written exam.
BA 1103  Business Math (3-0-3)
This course is designed to give a brief overview of the 
fundamental operations of arithmetic; common and decimal 
fractions; and percentages. Application of those fundamental 
operations to cash and trade discounts, merchandising, 
simple and compound interest, depreciation, and credit is 
studied. For those students who consider their academic 
preparation in mathematics to be lacking, we recommend 
that those students enroll in MATH 0124 prior to this course. 
Prerequisite: none (but MATH 0124 suggested).
BA 1303  Introduction to Business (3-0-3)
An introductory course for students specializing in business 
fields; survey of basic principles, forms, and practices involved 
in administration of the business firm in the American 
economy. [Fa,Sp,Su]
BA 1403  Business English (3-0-3) 
A course designed to provide intensive concentration on the 
principles of spelling, punctuation, capitalization, word forms, 
sentence structure, and proofreading, particularly as they 
apply to business. 
BA 2091-4  Special Topics in Business (Variable)
Selected topic(s) from one of the subject areas offered by 
the Business Division. May be repeated for up to a total of 
4 credit hours. Permission of Division Dean and 3 courses in 
the major area as determined by the nature of the program 
of study required. [Fa]
BA 2191-4  Business Administration Internship (Variable)
A supervised on-the-job training experience in an appropriate 
business, industry, government agency, or institution. 
Approved internships will meet part of the Program 
Requirements for the Associate in Applied Science degree. 
May be repeated for up to 4 hours of credit. Prerequisites: 
Approval of Business Division Dean and employer. [Fa,Sp,Su]
BA 2203  Business Law I (3-0-3)
A study of the general principles of the law of contracts, 
agencies, torts, bailments, corporate organizations, and 
employer-employee relationships. The student will be 
introduced to the concepts of legal processes, tort law, 
and contract law sufficiently to successfully navigate the 
legal landscape of operating or working in a business 
environment. [Fa,Sp,Su]
 
BA 2413  Business Ethics (3-0-3)
This course is designed to explore aspects of business 
ethics; such as, sources of American business ethics, 
traditional business practices, and anticipated future trends. 
Developers of moral and ethical concepts and their various 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
326

Biological Sciences (BIOL)
Business Administration (BA), continued
philosophies are investigated as related to corporate culture. 
Case studies involving real world situations are used to apply 
concepts. [Fa,Sp,Su]
BA 2503  Business Communication (3-0-3)
This course is designed to prepare students to write genres 
specific to business, deliver oral presentations, and develop 
interpersonal skills. Critical thinking and problem-solving skills 
are emphasized. Development of these skills is integrated 
with the use of technology. [Fa,Sp,Su]
BA 2513  Human Relations in Business (3-0-3)
Human Relations in Business deals with the complexities of 
human behavior as exhibited in an organizational environment 
and demonstrates how the success or failure of individual, 
group, and organizational goals is dependent upon effective 
work groups. 
BA 2523 Problem Solving in Business (3-0-3)
This course is designed to teach individuals how to develop 
and utilize crucial problem-solving techniques. Included in this 
in-depth study are practical applications involving conceptual 
models, assessment instruments, research findings, and case 
studies. 
BA 2603  Starting Your Own Business (3-0-3)
An introductory course designed for individuals interested 
in starting their own business. Emphasis is placed on 
developing and implementing a practical business plan, 
assessing the pros and cons of alternative forms of business, 
and identifying potential sources of financing. [Fa, Sp]
BA 2703  Training and Development (3-0-3)
A course to develop and administer training programs for 
profit and nonprofit organizations. Emphasis is placed on 
identifying training needs, developing effective training 
programs, preparing training leader guides, acquiring 
presentation skills, and administering the training department 
in an efficient and effective manner. [Sp]
BA 2713  Labor-Management Relations (3-0-3)
An introduction to the historical and legal aspects of the 
labor-management relationship. This course will include 
various elements of labor laws, administrative regulations, 
collective bargaining, grievance resolution, discipline 
procedures, and union agreements as related to human 
resource management. [Fa]
BA 2723  Legal Aspects of Employment (3-0-3)
An in-depth view of the legal concepts as they relate 
to employment. This course provides the student with a 
comprehensive study of equal employment opportunity 
legislation, enforcement agencies, affirmative action plans, 
court-ordered remedies, and employee assistance programs 
as related to human resource management. [Fa]
 
BA 2733  Employee Coaching & Counseling (3-0-3)
A course to prepare students to identify, examine, and 
resolve employee performance problems through effective 
coaching and counseling techniques. Emphasis is placed 
on team building, conflict resolution, and the learning 
process. Students will apply the methods learned in class by 
participating in practice counseling interviews. [Sp]
BA 2743  Recruitment & Interviewing (3-0-3)
A study of effective methods of identifying and selecting 
employment candidates to meet an organization's future 
human resource needs. Emphasis is placed on the 
development of employment screening and selection 
interview skills. In addition to textbook theory, the student 
will develop a model recruitment program and conduct mock 
interviews. [Sp]
BA 2793  Compensation (3-0-3)
A study of the various methods of establishing and maintaining 
effective compensation systems, employee benefit programs, 
and personnel records. This course will prepare the student 
to assess the current competitive employment market and 
to design effective pay scales, fringe benefit packages, and 
human resource information systems. [Fa]
BIOL 1001  Biological Concepts (1-0-1)
A basic introduction to biological concepts including scientific 
inquiry, living organisms, macromolecules and cell structure. 
Common and useful tools for studying science will also be 
reviewed.
BIOL 1093  Field Studies in Natural History (1-2-3)
Field studies of the natural history of various regions around 
the world. Studies will cover the systematic, ecology, 
physiology and morphology of the taxonomic groups 
represented by plant, fungi and animal species encountered 
in the region of study. Emphasis will also be placed on each 
species’ specific adaptations to the physical environment. 
Additional studies will include exploring the regional geology, 
paleontology, paleogeography, soils, geomorphology, and 
geological processes for the selected region. Additional 
expenses will be required.  
BIOL 1114  Introduction to Biology (3-2-4)
Designed for non-science majors. This course is designed 
to give non-science majors a general view of life science 
with an emphasis on current issues. This course includes 
the nature of science, cells, cell growth, molecular genetics, 
cellular reproduction, heredity, and selected topics and 
issues concerning the human body. Lab fee: $15. 
BIOL 1124  General Biology I (3-2-4) 
Designed for Science majors. This course includes a study 
of inorganic chemistry and biochemistry; cells; biochemical 
processes; cellular reproduction; molecular genetics; 
heredity; evolution; selected plant and animal systems and 
ecology. Lab fee: $15. 
BIOL 1134  General Biology II (3-2-4)
Designed for science majors, this second semester General 
Biology I course explores the diversity, adaptations, and 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
327

Biological Sciences (BIOL), continued
Chemistry (CHEM)
evolutionary relationships of living things on earth including 
bacteria, protists, fungi, plants, and animals. Emphasis is 
also placed in the morphology, reproduction, development, 
nutrition, transport, and regulation of plants and animals. Lab 
fee: $15. Prerequisite: BIOL 1124.
BIOL 1215  General Botany (4-2-5) 
General plant study dealing with the structure and function of 
plant parts as well as classification, life cycles, genetics, and 
ecological relationships. Lab fee: $15. 
BIOL 1315  General Zoology (4-3-5)
General animal study dealing with the structures, functions, 
characteristics, life histories, and habits of members of the 
animal kingdom. Lab fee: $15. 
BIOL 2035  Principles of Microbiology (3-4-5) 
An introductory study of the biology of the lower organisms 
with an emphasis on characteristics, cultivation, identification 
and diseases associated with bacteria, viruses, fungi, and 
protozoa. Cell biology, cellular metabolism, molecular 
genetics, immunology, and host-parasite relations are 
included. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: CHEM 1114 and BIOL 
1124.
BIOL 2091-6  Special Topics in Biology (Variable) 
Directed individual study of special topics and special courses 
in life science. To offer special instruction in life science to 
technical personnel of area companies or agencies and to 
other select groups of the community. 
BIOL 2103  Cell Biology (3-0-3) 
The basic features of cells and methods of studying them. 
Elementary cellular chemistry, structures, and functions of 
cellular organelles; cellular mechanisms of reproduction and 
differentiation. Prerequisites: BIOL 1124 and CHEM 1114 or 
equivalent.
BIOL 2203  Biotechnology (1-4-3)
An introductory look at modern lab techniques involved 
with the investigation of molecular and cell biology. 
Emphasis on theory behind the procedures performed in 
the modern biotechnology lab and the practice of those 
techniques. Techniques of particular interest will be micro-
level measurement, molecular extraction, quantification, 
gel electrophoresis, polymerase chain reaction, blotting 
techniques, high-throughput processes, and database 
mining. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: BIOL 1124 and CHEM 1114, 
Prerequisite/corequisite: BIOL 2103 or equivalent.
BIOL 2424  Human Physiology (3-3-4) 
Functions of human organ systems in homeostasis. Includes 
circulation, digestion, endocrine and nervous control, 
kidney function, metabolism, muscle action, male and 
female reproductive systems, and respiratory. Lab fee: $15. 
Prerequisites: CHEM 1114 and BIOL 1124 or HSBC 2114.
BIOL 2444  Ecology (3-2-4) 
Study of the intra- and interrelationships of plants and 
animals and man's influence on the various ecosystems. Lab 
fee: $15. Prerequisite: At least 4 hours of BIOL 1114, BIOL 1124, 
BIOL 1215, BIOL 1315, or equivalent.
NOTE: Rose State College is committed to the academic 
success of its students. Appropriate placement is a vital 
element to each student’s success. A student’s placement 
scores (within 3 years) through high school GPA, ACT, SAT, 
or Next Generation ACCUPLACER adequately determine 
college-level readiness as well as the ability to exhibit skills 
in performing various math competencies. These math 
competencies are fundamental to success in chemistry.
 
CHEM 0141 Introduction to Chemistry Studio (1-0-1)
This course is meant for students who are enrolled in CHEM 
1114, Introductory Chemistry, but with placement exam scores 
which indicate supplemental work on math and chemistry 
would help them be successful in the college level course. 
Prerequisite: MATH 0144 or equivalent.
CHEM 1114  Introductory Chemistry (3-3-4)
A one-semester course designed primarily for students who 
wish to obtain a general knowledge of the fundamental 
principles of inorganic chemistry. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: 
MATH 0144 or equivalent.
CHEM 1124  Introductory Organic &  Biochemistry (3-3-4) 
A course designed principally for the student whose major 
interest is in one of the health-related fields. It will include 
an introduction to the principles of organic chemistry of 
significance to biology and to compounds and reactions of 
physiological importance. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: CHEM 
1114 or CHEM 1135, or equivalent.
CHEM 1135  General College Chemistry I (3-5-5) 
This course deals with the fundamental laws and theory 
of chemistry, together with a study of the elements and 
important compounds. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: High 
school chemistry with a "C" or better or CHEM 1114; and MATH 
0144 or equivalent.
CHEM 1145  General College Chemistry II (3-5-5)
This course is a continuation of CHEM 1135 and includes 
equilibrium, kinetics, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, 
qualitative analysis, and other selected topics. Lab fee: $15. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 1135 or CHEM 1225.
CHEM 1225  Chemistry for Engineers (4-1-5)
A one-semester general chemistry survey course designed 
primarily for engineering students, with a particular focus 
on applications in materials, energy, and the environment 
relevant to engineers. Lab Fee: $15.00 Prerequisites: high 
school chemistry with a "C" or better or CHEM 1114; and MATH 
0144 or equivalent.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
328

Chemistry (CHEM), continued
CHEM 2091-6  Special Topics in Chemistry (Variable) 
Directed individual study of special topics and special courses 
in chemistry designed to offer special instruction in chemistry 
to technical personnel of area companies or agencies and to 
other selected groups of the community.
CHEM 2103  Organic Chemistry I (3-0-3) 
This course is the first semester of a 2-semester integrated 
sequence for science majors and preprofessional students. 
CHEM 2103 is intended to accompany CHEM 2112. Intended 
to introduce students to fundamental concepts of structure, 
stereochemistry, selected functional groups, nomenclature, 
properties, reactivity, mechanisms, and spectroscopy 
related to hydrocarbons and their derivatives. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 1145.
CHEM 2112  Organic Chemistry I Laboratory (1-3-2)
This lab is an introduction to techniques utilized in organic 
chemistry. Emphasis is on isolation, purification and 
characterization of organic compounds. An introduction of 
gas chromatography and infrared spectroscopy is presented. 
The experiments are designed to complement the principles 
concurrently presented in the corresponding lecture class. 
Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: CHEM 1145 and CHEM 2103, or 
concurrent enrollment in CHEM 2103.
CHEM 2115  Survey of Organic Chemistry (3-4-5) 
A one-semester course in aliphatic, aromatic, and heterocyclic 
organic chemistry with an emphasis on functional groups, 
carbohydrates, proteins, vitamins, and drugs. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 1145 or equivalent.
CHEM 2154  Quantitative Analysis (2-6-4)
Theory and practice of gravimetric and volumetric analysis 
and an introduction to instrumental methods of analytical 
chemistry. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CHEM 1145 or equivalent.
CHEM 2203  Organic Chemistry II (3-0-3)
This course is the second semester of a 2-semester integrated 
sequence and should be taken the semester following 
enrollment in CHEM 2103. CHEM 2203 is intended to 
accompany CHEM 2212. Continues the development of the 
chemistry of functional groups with emphasis on aldehydes 
and ketones, carboxylic acids, amines, and phenols in 
both aliphatic and aromatic compounds then concludes 
with the introduction of biological molecules. Mechanisms 
and stereochemistry are emphasized. The application of 
spectroscopy is continued. Prerequisite: CHEM 2103. 
CHEM 2212  Organic Chemistry II Laboratory (1-3-2)
This lab course is a continuation of techniques developed 
in CHEM 2112. Emphasis on spectroscopy, interpretation of 
spectra, qualitative analysis, and multi-step synthesis. The 
experiments are designed to complement the principles 
concurrently presented in the corresponding lecture class. 
Lab fee: $15. Prerequisites: CHEM 2103, CHEM 2112, and 
CHEM 2203 or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 2203.
Computer & Information Technology (CIT)
CIT 1093  Microcomputer Applications (3-0-3) 
A study of the utilization of commercially available 
microcomputer software packages in small business 
information systems using the Windows® environment. Lab 
fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1103  Introduction to Computers (3-0-3) 
An introductory study of the computer industry, including 
the role of the computer in business and society, 
computer functions, processing techniques, programming 
languages, microcomputer systems and applications, data 
communications, and future trends. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1113  Fundamentals of Programming Logic (3-0-3)
An introductory course in developing both procedural and 
object-oriented logic for problem solving, utilizing several 
program development tools and techniques, including 
traditional flowcharts, hierarchy charts, and pseudocode. 
Developed logic will be translated into simple script programs 
to introduce elementary programming techniques and to 
allow the student to see the relationship between logic tool 
output and finished source code. Fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1123  Visual Basic® (3-0-3) 
This course will provide students with experience in event-
driven programming using the Microsoft Visual Basic® 
language to analyze and solve typical business problems. 
Flowcharting techniques will be used to provide instruction 
in object-oriented design logic. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 
1113 or CIT 1613. [Fa,Sp]
CIT 1173  C++® Language (3-0-3)
Fundamental concepts of the C++® programming language 
with emphasis on solving business-oriented problems. Lab 
fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1113 or CIT 1613 or permission of 
instructor. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1203  Script Programming (3-0-3)
The student will be introduced to the Python language and 
provided an introductory look at Java Script. Lab fee $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 1113  Fundamentals of Programming Logic 
(Cyber majors are exempt.)
CIT 1293  Oracle® (3-0-3)
A study of the principles, theory and practice of database 
management, 
and 
relational 
database 
application 
development. The course includes client/server concepts, 
relational concepts, database design and development 
techniques, integrated database applications, Structured 
Query Language (SQL™), creation of tables, queries, forms, 
reports, and graphs. Requires a running project. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 2013. [Sp]
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
329

Computer & Information Technology (CIT), continued
CIT 1503  Network+ Certification Preparation (3-0-3) 
This course is an introductory course which covers the 
fundamental hardware and software concepts involved in 
a basic network. The standard open systems interconnect  
model, popular LAN topologies and network administration 
will be discussed. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su] 
CIT 1523  Computer Hardware & Operating Systems (3-0-3)
This course will provide students with an introductory course 
covering computers and peripheral devices. A current 
operating system will also be presented. Understanding 
and utilizing hardware components and operating system 
software as a "system" will be stressed. Lab fee: $10. 
[Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1533  Principles of Cybersecurity (3-0-3)
The students will be introduced to the fundamentals of 
cyber security. Students will gain insight into the importance 
of cyber security, and the integral role of cyber security 
professionals. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1613 Introduction to Java® Programming (3-0-3) 
The student will learn the fundamentals of object-oriented 
programming using Java®. Students will study development of 
both object-based and object-oriented programs using Java® 
language features and the Java® Application Programming 
Interface (API). Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1113 or CIT 1203 
or permission of professor. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 1713  C#® (C Sharp) Programming (3-0-3) 
An introductory-level course that presents Windows® and web 
application development using C#® programming language. 
Emphasis will be placed on core language elements, data 
types, logic structures and an introduction to the .NET 
Framework and its class library. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: 
CIT 1113 or CIT 1173 or CIT 1613 or permission of professor. 
[Fa,Sp]
CIT 2013  Database Theory & Design (3-0-3)
A study of the principles and theory of database management. 
The course includes entity analysis, normal forms, relational 
versus other databases, and elementary database 
implementation using a DBMS. This course requires a 
running project. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 2053  Network Administration (3-0-3) 
This course covers installation of hardware and software, 
network protocols, devices and drivers, file systems and 
storage, group policy, printers, security and remote access. 
Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp,Su]
CIT 2091-4  Selected Technical Topics (Variable)
This course is designed to meet computer application 
requirements and skill enhancements in industry and personal 
use. Prerequisite: Permission of dean/professor.
CIT 2103  Access® (3-0-3)
A study of the development of advanced solutions to typical 
business problems using Microsoft Access®. The course will 
concentrate on using the macro language and Visual Basic 
for Applications. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp]
CIT 2123  Advanced Visual Basic® (3-0-3)
This course will provide students with experience in real-
world problem-solving using event-driven programming 
techniques with the Microsoft Visual Basic® programming 
language to manage information databases, graphics and 
other complex data formats. Object-oriented programming 
techniques and program code reusability will be emphasized. 
Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1123. [Sp]
 
CIT 2143 Data Structures (3-0-3)
This course covers analysis and design of fundamental data 
structures and engages learners to use data structures as 
tools to algorithmically design efficient computer programs 
that will cope with the complexity of actual applications. 
The course focuses on basic and essential topics in data 
structures, including array-based lists, linked lists, hash 
tables, recursion, binary trees, scapegoat trees, red-black 
trees, heaps, sorting algorithms and graphs. Lab fee $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 2613
CIT 2153 C Programming Language (3-0-3)
The student will learn the fundamentals of C language 
programming. Students will study development of structure 
and array-based programs with pointers and memory 
allocation using the C programming language. Lab Fee $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 1173 or CIT 1613 or permission of professor.
CIT 2173  Windows® Programming in C++®NET (3-0-3) 
This course will introduce students to Windows® application 
development in the C++® programming language in the .NET 
environment and to principles of object-oriented event-driven 
programming. Emphasis will be placed on basic approaches 
to development using the Microsoft Foundation Class (MFC) 
hierarchy and the tools available in the Microsoft Visual C++ 
integrated development environment. Students will review 
core object-oriented programming principles: classes and 
objects, information hiding, inheritance and polymorphism; 
then apply these principles to understanding MFC and to 
development of basic Windows applications. The course 
will cover dialog-based, single document interface (SDI) and 
multiple document interface (MDI) applications. Once basic 
applications are mastered, the course will turn to database 
applications and dynamic link libraries (DLL). Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 1173. [Fa]
CIT 2183  Advanced Database Design (3-0-3)
This course will include a study of the principles and theory 
of database management and design to include network 
hierarchical, and relational. Industry standard software 
applications such as SQL™ or Oracle® will be used to enforce 
the concepts learned. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2103 or 
CIT 2013. [Sp]
 
CIT 2243  Unix®/Linux® (3-0-3)
An in-depth study is conducted of the Unix®/Linux® operating 
system and how these operating systems are incorporated in 
today’s networks. Lab Fee: $10. [Fa]
CIT 2313  Capstone Project (3-0-3)
This course provides the student with an opportunity to 
demonstrate skills in communicating content within his/her 
major. The student will utilize problem solving by developing 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
330

Computer & Information Technology (CIT), continued
a useful business project from problem definition through 
implementation. This project is finalized by a presentation 
accompanied by full documentation describing the project. 
Note: This course should be taken during the last semester. 
Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: permission of professor. {Fa,Sp]
CIT 2323  Security+ Certification Preparation (3-0-3)
The student will learn the fundamentals of network security. 
Students will study security design and development. Lab 
fee: $10. [Fa]
 
CIT 2343  Routing (3-0-3)
Basic router components and configurations, troubleshooting 
connectivity problems and analysis of business operations 
based on specific network needs will be included in this 
in-depth study. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1503. [Fa]
CIT 2393  Structured Query Language (SQL™) (3-0-3)
The student will study the fundamentals of Structured Query 
Language (SQL™) syntax. Students will learn to interact with 
a relational database through the use of Data Manipulation 
language (DML) and Data Definition Language (DDL) statements. 
Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2103 or CIT 2013. [Sp]
CIT 2423  Network Troubleshooting and Management 
Design (3-0-3) 
This course will cover basic network troubleshooting 
approaches. Students will learn to isolate network problems 
and understand how network troubleshooting equipment 
is used. The student will be taught fault management, 
configuration management, performance management, 
security management, and accounting management. Lab 
fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2053. [Sp]
CIT 2433  Cloud+ Certification Preparation (3-0-3)
CompTIA Cloud+ validates the skills a student needs to 
maintain and optimize cloud infrastructure services. Cloud+ 
covers the increased diversity of knowledge, skills and 
abilities required of system administrators to validate what 
is necessary to perform effectively in data center jobs. Lab 
Fee: $10.
CIT 2513  Secure E-Commerce (3-0-3)
This course is an in-depth study of secure electronic commerce, 
cryptography, passwords, certification authorities, public key 
infrastructure, biometrics and digital signatures. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 1503 or permission of professor. [Fa]
CIT 2523  Information Security Management (3-0-3)
This course examines managerial aspects of computer 
security and risk management for enterprises. The student 
will acquire information for accreditation, procurement, 
extension and operation principles for secure computing 
systems. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1533. 
CIT 2533  Ethics in Information Technology (3-0-3)
This course will examine the interactions of IT professionals 
with the organization, profession, and governmental 
agencies, including regulatory compliance monitoring, legal 
requirements, staff development and environmental conduct. 
Lab fee: $10. 
CIT 2553  Digital Forensics (3-0-3)
Students will gain practical knowledge on how to conduct 
digital investigations and preserve evidence that stands up to 
inquiries. Lab Fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1533. [Fa]
CIT 2563  Cryptography & Trusted Systems (3-0-3)
Students will be introduced to security problems in 
computing, basic encryption and decryption techniques. 
Secure encryption systems and cryptographic protocols and 
practices will also be presented. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: 
CIT 1533; successful completion of, or concurrent enrollment 
in CIT 1203; and successful completion of, or concurrent 
enrollment in, either MATH 1513 or MATH 1483. [Sp]
 
CIT 2573  Secure System Administration/Certification (3-0-3)
Students will be exposed to provisioning, procurement and 
installation of network, hardware and software systems 
for mission critical enterprises. System configuration, 
maintenance, incident handling and response along with 
system certification, testing and validation will be covered. 
Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1533. [Fa,Sp]
CIT 2583  Operating Systems (3-0-3)
This course will examine the fundamental concepts that 
are applicable to a variety of systems. Various systems that 
support threads at the kernel and user levels, symmetric 
multiprocessing and real-time scheduling will be included in 
the topic manner. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisites: CIT 1523, CIT 
1613, and MATH 1513. [Sp]
CIT 2603  Ethical Hacking & Systems Defense (3-0-3)
This class covers best computer-security practices and 
industry standards to deter attacks and better defend 
networks. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1533.
CIT 2613  Advanced Java® Programming (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide students an in-depth look 
at Java® programming. The student will learn advanced topics 
in this object-oriented programming language. The student 
will also incorporate multimedia, networking and input/output 
techniques. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1613 or CIT 1173 or 
CIT 1713 or permission of instructor. [Fa]
CIT 2633  Enterprise Threat Assessment (3-0-3)
This course is designed to teach managers, executives, 
security and business continuity professionals, risk 
managers, compliance personnel, and enterprise threat 
program managers to develop strategies for protecting 
their organizations from security threats, and to better 
manage risks. Topics covered include the CERT Resilience 
Management Model (CERT-RMM), National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) SP800-18, NIST SP800-
30, NIST SP 800-34, NIST SP 800-39, and enterprise threat 
assessment best practices. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 
2523.
CIT 2643  Wireless Networks (3-0-3)
This course is a study of wireless networking. Management, 
design, deployment and security of Wireless Local Area 
Networks (WLANs) will be topics covered in this course. Lab 
fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 1503. [Fa,Sp]
 
CIT 2673 Seminar in Unit Testing (3-0-3)
The student will learn the fundamentals of unit testing 
as part of software development.  Focus will be on using 
the C# language and testing frameworks MSTest and 
NUnit.  The course will cover object oriented programming 
in C#. Lab fee $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2613 or CIT 1713. 
 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
331

CIT 2713  Advanced C#® (C Sharp) (3-0-3)
This course will provide students with experience in real-
world problem solving using object oriented programming 
techniques with the Microsoft® Visual C#® programming 
language to produce both Windows® and web applications. 
Object oriented programming techniques and program code 
reusability will be emphasized. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 
1713 or permission of professor.
CIT 2753 Incident Response (3-0-3)
Incident response is an organized approach to addressing and 
managing the aftermath of a security breach or cyberattack, 
also known as an IT incident, computer incident or security 
incident.  The goal is to handle the situation in a way that 
limits damage and reduces recovery time and costs.  Lab Fee 
$10.  Prerequisite:  CIT 2523
 
CIT 2763 Security Scripting (3-0-3)
This course will cover scripting utilizing various languages 
and then focus on developing scripts that could be used for 
security testing, data analysis or other routine tasks for an IT 
professional.  Lab fee $10.  Prerequisite: CIT 1203.
 
CIT 2773 Virtualization Fundamentals (3-0-3)
Virtualization is used by IT professionals in the data center, on 
the desktop, and in the cloud to gain tremendous efficiency. 
In this course, the topics of server, desktop, storage, and 
network virtualization will be covered.  Lab fee $10.  [Fa,Sp]
 
CIT 2853  Mobile & Networking Forensics (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide students an in-depth 
look at mobile devices and networking components from 
the digital forensics point of view. The latest hardware 
and software tools will be used to query, analyze, and 
perform forensics analysis on both mobile devices and 
networking components. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2553 
or concurrent enrollment. 
CIT 2863  Data Recovery & Reporting (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide students an in-depth 
hands-on look at techniques and software platforms used 
to recover and analyze digital data. Data recovery will be 
performed on various platforms utilizing many manual and 
automated tools. Data analysis will be performed on the data 
recovered. Proper reporting techniques on digital forensics 
data will be introduced. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: CIT 2553 
or concurrent enrollment. 
CIT 2873  Digital Forensics Reporting (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide students with hands-
on practice on preparing reports on digital forensics data. 
Students will be introduced to the legal aspects of digital 
forensics and what is required to support their digital 
forensics investigation in the legal system. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 2553 or concurrent enrollment. 
CIT 2883  Reverse Engineering (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide students with the 
necessary knowledge and hands-on experience to detect 
and determine the true nature of Windows® binary files. 
Students will learn how to recognize the high-level language 
constructs critical to performing a thorough and professional 
reverse engineering analysis of a binary. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: CIT 2553 or concurrent enrollment.
Computer & Information Technology (CIT), continued
Computer Science (CS)
CS 1313  Programming for STEM (3-0-3)
This course will utilize the Python and Matlab computer 
programming languages with applications focusing on STEM 
related fields of study. This course is intended for students 
in a computer science degree program and/or STEM related 
disciplines. Prerequisite: MATH 1513.
Criminal Justice (CJ)
CJ 1103  Introduction to the Criminal Process (3-0-3) 
A survey course of the entire criminal process field.  Special 
emphasis is given the criminal justice field (law enforcement, 
court, corrections, and juvenile justice) with respect to 
its history and philosophy, current problems, general 
organization, and operation.
CJ 1113  Introduction to Corrections (3-0-3) 
This is a basic course examining the entire correctional 
system from law enforcement through the administration 
of justice, probation, parole, prison systems and 
correctional institutions. This course will also include a 
brief examination of the social systems of prisons. 
CJ 1123  Introduction to Law Enforcement (3-0-3) 
A course designed to acquaint the student with the goals, 
functions, historical background, and operation of the field of 
law enforcement, and to satisfy part of the requirements for 
the Collegiate Officer Program. Career opportunities in law 
enforcement will be explored. This course is required for all 
Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students. Crosslisted with 
POLS 1123.
CJ 2101-3  Special Problems in Law Enforcement (Var.) 
Specific interests in law enforcement may be developed 
in this course. Criminal investigation, police administration, 
crime lab methods, crime prevention, and crime detection are 
a few of the topics the student might choose. This provides 
the opportunity to expand a student’s interest beyond the 
curriculum currently offered.
CJ 2193  Criminal Justice Internship (3-0-3) 
This course will allow students, through internships, the 
opportunity to observe and experience a variety of activities 
directly related to the operation of criminal justice agencies/
centers. Prerequisite: Permission of professor.
CJ 2303  Cultural Diversity & Criminal Justice (3-0-3)
The student will learn to identify the differences and 
similarities among diverse groups and understand how these 
differences and similarities impact members of the criminal 
justice system. An emphasis will be placed on Community 
Relations/Community Oriented Policing and Police Ethics. 
This course is required for all Collegiate Officer Program 
(COP) students. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
332

Criminal Justice (CJ), continued
CJ 2401  Police Report Writing (1-0-1)
This course will prepare criminal justice students to write 
affidavits, incident reports, investigative reports and other 
reports common to the criminal justice field. This course is 
required of all Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students.
CJ 2453  Probation, Parole, & Community Corrections 
(3-0-3)
This is a basic course examining the historical and 
contemporary aspect of probation, parole, and community 
corrections. This course is intended to enhance the interest 
and qualifications for those who intend to enter into the 
criminal justice field.
CJ 2503 Criminology (3-0-3)
A study of the nature and causes of various forms of illegal 
activity. Emphasis is given to the role of social factors in the 
genesis of deviant motivation and to the question of how 
this motivation comes to be expressed as criminal activity. 
Crosslisted with SOC 2503.  Prerequisite:  SOC 1113.
CJ 2603  Criminal Procedure (3-0-3)
A study of the nature and scope of police power, as well as 
the extent and limitations thereof under the U.S. Constitution, 
Legislative Acts, and decisions by the various courts of the 
Judicial System of the U.S. The major focus will be on the 
statutes and procedures of Oklahoma, specifically portions 
of O.S. Titles 10, 21, 22, 37, and 63. This course is required of 
all Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students. This course is 
only offered in the spring semester.
CJ 2703  Delinquency & the Juvenile Justice System (3-0-3) 
This course includes information regarding theories of 
juvenile delinquency, current rehabilitation models of 
juvenile offenders, substantive and procedural criminal law 
as it relates to juveniles, tracing the constitutional protections 
of juvenile offenders and a study of law enforcement’s 
response to the juvenile justice system as it applies to the 
state of Oklahoma’s juvenile code.
CJ 2803  Criminal Investigation & Interviewing (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide the criminal justice student 
and law enforcement practitioner with the fundamental 
information for a general overview of the field of criminal 
investigation. Information will be provided covering, but not 
limited to, criminal investigation equipment, investigative 
techniques, specific types of investigations/offenses, case 
preparations, courtroom testimony, and interviewing/
interrogation techniques. This course is required of all 
Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students. This course is 
only offered in the fall semester.
CJ 2863  Ethics in Criminal Justice (3-0-3)
This is a basic course examining the actions which constitute 
unethical behavior of a criminal justice professional and 
their consequences. The student of criminal justice will 
understand the concepts of ethics in law enforcement, 
the courts, and corrections. This course is required of all 
Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students. This course is 
only offered in the spring semester.
Economics (ECON)
ECON 2103  Personal Finance (3-0-3)
This course will provide comprehensive coverage of personal 
financial planning in the areas of money management, 
career planning, taxes, consumer credit, housing, and other 
consumer decisions, legal protection, insurance, investments, 
retirement planning, and estate planning. [Fa,Sp,Su]
ECON 2303  Principles of Microeconomics (3-0-3)
A study of the concept of scarcity as it applies to consumer 
behavior, product markets, and resource markets with an 
emphasis on the application of these theories to current 
microeconomic problems. [Fa,Sp,Su]
ECON 2403  Principles of Macroeconomics (3-0-3)
A study of the concept of scarcity as it applies to aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply. This study will investigate the 
problems of inflation, unemployment and economic growth 
through the presentation of Keynesian theory, monetary 
theory, and other concepts developed to deal with these 
issues. [Fa,Sp,Su]
ECON 2503  Introduction to Investments (3-0-3)
A course to develop a decision-making format that will allow 
the individual investor to evaluate alternative investment 
opportunities and choose a strategy that is consistent with 
his/her goals. To accomplish this objective, a decision-
making system will be presented as well as a detailed study 
of investment alternatives such as stocks, bonds, mutual 
bonds, treasury bills, real estate, precious metals, IRA's, etc. 
[Fa,Sp]
ECON 2843  Elements of Statistics (3-0-3)
This course will address the elementary theory and application 
of statistical techniques stressing the fundamental nature 
of statistical methods. The subject matter includes an 
introduction to both descriptive and inferential statistical 
methodology and interpretation. More specifically the course 
will include an overview of central tendency and dispersion 
measures, probability theory and probability distributions, 
sampling 
distributions, 
parameter 
estimation 
using 
confidence intervals, single and multiple sample hypothesis 
tests of the mean using z-tests, t-tests, and analysis of 
variance, chi-square tests, and simple linear regression. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or MATH 1483. [Fa,Sp,Su]
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
333

Education (EDUC)
EDUC 1103  College & Life Strategies (3-0-3)
This course is designed to help students develop effective 
approaches for completion of their Rose State College 
education. The knowledge and concepts behind such 
strategies are also transferable to other educational, 
professional, and personal context.
EDUC 2091-3  Special Topics in Education (Variable)
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in 
Education. Topics to be determined.
English (ENGL)
NOTE: Rose State College is committed to the academic 
success of its students. Appropriate placement is a vital 
element to each student’s success. A student’s placement 
scores (within 3 years) through high school GPA, ACT, SAT 
or Next Generation ACCUPLACER, adequately determine 
college-level readiness, the ability to write clear, cohesive 
paragraphs, including grammar, syntax and semantics. If this 
level is not cleared by the test, developmental courses may 
be required.
ENGL 0131  English Composition Studio (1-0-1)
This course is only offered during interim sessions and may be 
taken by students whose writing placement scores indicate 
an intense review of grammar, punctuation, mechanics, and 
language usage skills is necessary to meet required college 
standards for enrollment in ENGL 1113. Students who place 
into this course and successfully complete it with a grade of 
"C" or higher are then eligible to enroll in ENGL 1113, English 
Composition I.  Students who do not complete with a grade of 
"C" or higher instead are eligible to enroll in ENGL 0142 and 
ENGL 1113 as co-requisite courses. Prerequisite:  appropriate 
assessment scores.
ENGL 0133 English Composition Review (3-0-3)
This course provides an intense review of the basic elements 
of Standard English usage to enable students to improve 
grammar, language, and punctuation skills while employing 
critical thinking strategies and the writing process to 
respond to a variety of writing situations. The course focuses 
on sentence, paragraph, and basic essay structure and 
development with attention to the mechanical and structural 
elements of the writing process. Students who successfully 
complete this course with a grade of C or higher are then 
eligible to take ENGL 1113 with ENGL 0142 as a co-requisite 
course. Prerequisite: Satisfactory assessment scores.
ENGL 0142 Integrated Composition Skills (2-0-2)
This course provides co-requisite instruction for students who 
wish to begin their college-level composition studies while 
also removing their writing placement deficiency. Students 
enrolling in this course must be concurrently enrolled in the 
associated ENGL 1113 section since much of the content and 
course material between the two courses will be integrated. In 
ENGL 0142, students learn and practice specific college-level 
composition skills through critical reading and writing, class 
discussions, workshops, lectures, quizzes, or presentations. 
Prerequisite: Appropriate assessment scores or successful 
completion of ENGL 0133.
ENGL 1113  English Composition I (3-0-3)
This is the first in a two-course sequence that integrates 
critical reading, thinking, writing, and other communication 
skills to prepare students to compose texts in both academic 
and professional career situations. In this first course, English 
Composition I provides instruction on college level writing 
covering essay structure, grammatical skills, argumentative 
writing techniques, and research methods  Students will 
write documented essays using appropriate research citation 
styles.  Students are also required to write other formal and 
informal assignments.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of 
ENGL 0131 with a grade of C or better; successful completion 
of ENGL 0133 with a grade of C or better and concurrent 
enrollment in ENGL 0142; or satisfactory assessment score 
for ENGL 1113.
 
ENGL 1213  English Composition II (3-0-3)
This is the second in a 2-course sequence that integrates 
critical reading, thinking, writing, and other communication 
skills to prepare students to construct discourse in both 
academic and professional career situations. In this course, 
students continue to engage in close reading of textual and 
visual compositions; however, the construction of argument, 
and its role in public discourse, is emphasized. Students 
learn to write longer, more sustained arguments with more 
sophisticated logic, rhetorical skill, and critical complexity. 
Students will write documented essays using appropriate 
research citation styles.  Students are also required to 
write other formal and informal assignments. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of ENGL 1113.
ENGL 1913  Writing for the Health Professions (3-0-3)
Writing for the Health Professions is designed to help 
students interested in careers in the health professions 
transition from college-level writing to “real world” 
professional communication. The course exposes students 
to advanced  research resources and strategies particular to 
the health professions in order to read, analyze, and produce 
professional documents, including cover letters, resumes, 
personal statements, project proposals, and review articles. 
The course covers the complex process writers need to learn 
to accomplish this goal, including how to tailor information for 
specific audiences; how to use stylistic and visual devices to 
make information more accessible; and how to edit their work 
as well as that of their peers. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.  This 
class is only offered in the fall semester.
ENGL 2033  Creative Writing (3-0-3)
This course is designed to acquaint the student with 
various modes of creative expression in poetry and short 
fiction and those devices and techniques necessary to 
the development of creative writing skills. The course will 
provide closely supervised applied study of such elements 
of poetry as imagery, metaphorical language, rhyme, 
meter, and symbolism, and such elements of fiction as 
plot, characterization, description, dialogue, and theme. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. This class is only offered in the fall 
semester.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
334

English (ENGL), continued
ENGL 2053  Technical Report Writing (3-0-3)
This course is designed to assist students in developing skills 
for writing as professionals in the workplace, as distinct from 
academic settings. Emphasis in this course is on improving 
the written and oral communication skills of students seeking 
careers in business, technical, or scientific fields. Writing 
instruction will also include principles of collaborative writing, 
rhetorical analysis, research, documentation, and writing 
for digital media. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. This class is only 
offered in the spring semester.
ENGL 2063  Poetry Writing (3-0-3) 
In this class, students will participate in various kinds of 
poetry writing activities, be introduced to internationally-
known contemporary poets, and critique one another's 
work via the workshop process. Students will also learn 
manuscript format, become familiar with publishing 
markets, be introduced to prosody, prepare a writing 
portfolio, and participate in a public student poetry 
reading. This class is only offered in the spring semester. 
ENGL 2091-3  Special Topics in English (Variable) 
A course of directed individual or class study of special topics 
in composition or literature. May be repeated with different 
topics. Permission of professor required.
 
ENGL 2113  Introduction to Literature (3-0-3) 
A study of the various types of literature and the terminology 
and standards for analyzing and evaluating each. May be taken 
as Humanities credit for General Education requirements. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or concurrent enrollment.
ENGL 2123  Introduction to Cinema (3-0-3)
A study of the development of film as a cultural influence, 
with special emphasis on the methods by which themes are 
presented. Attention given to unique cinematic techniques 
that distinguish films from other creative works. Film criticism 
and cultural writing stressed. May be taken as Humanities 
credit for General Education requirements. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1213 or equivalent. 
ENGL 2133  Bible as Literature (3-0-3) 
A survey course in Biblical literature introducing students 
to the academic study of the Bible as a literary and cultural 
document. This course emphasizes the themes and literary 
forms of the Bible, as well as the historical and cultural 
contexts from which the Bible, including the Hebrew Tanak, 
Apocrypha, and Christian New Testament, was written. 
May be taken as credit for Humanities General Education 
Requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or equivalent. This 
class is only offered in the fall semester (even years). 
ENGL 2153  Fantasy & Science Fiction Literature (3-0-3) 
A survey of the best fantasy and science fiction literature, 
including epics, utopian novels, and gothic tales that are 
the seeds of modern imaginative literature. Classical literary 
criteria will be stressed and applied to the various literary 
genres. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or equivalent. This class is 
only offered in the spring interim semester.
ENGL 2213  American Literature to 1865 (3-0-3) 
An American literature survey exploring the works of 
American writers who have been a force in shaping the 
American literary tradition. The course covers the Colonial 
Period through the Civil War Period. May be taken as credit 
for Humanities General Education requirements. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1213 or equivalent.
ENGL 2223  American Literature from 1865 (3-0-3) 
An American literature survey exploring the works of American 
writers who have been a force in shaping the American 
literary tradition. The course covers the period from the Civil 
War through the present. May be taken as Humanities credit 
for General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 
or equivalent.
ENGL 2233  Native American Literature (3-0-3)
A survey of the literature of the Native American from 
Pre-Columbian time through the present including poetry, 
fiction, oratory, biography, legend, and essay. May be taken 
as credit for Humanities General Education Requirements. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or equivalent. This class is only 
offered in the spring semester.
ENGL 2243  African American Literature (3-0-3) 
An American literature survey exploring the works of African 
American writers who have been a force in shaping the 
American literary tradition. May be taken as credit for 
Humanities General Education Requirements. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1213 or equivalent. This class is only offered in the fall 
semester.
ENGL 2253  Women in American Literature (3-0-3)
This course examines the images of women reflected 
in American literature to provide an overall view of the 
changing roles women have experienced culturally, socially, 
and psychologically. May be taken as Humanities credit for 
General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or 
equivalent. This class is only offered in the summer semester. 
ENGL 2313  English Literature to 1798 (3-0-3)
A survey course covering British literature from the Anglo-
Saxon beginnings to 1798. May be taken as Humanities credit 
for General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 
or equivalent.
ENGL 2323  English Literature from 1798 (3-0-3) 
A survey course covering British literature beginning with the 
Romantic movement and concluding with 20th century writers. 
May be taken as Humanities credit for General Education 
requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or equivalent.
ENGL 2413  World Literature to 1674 (3-0-3) 
A survey of world literary masterpieces from classical Greek 
and Roman literature through the Middle Ages and into the 
Renaissance literature. Special attention is given to historical/
cultural development. May be taken as Humanities credit for 
General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or 
equivalent.
ENGL 2423  World Literature from 1674 (3-0-3) 
A study of representative works of world literature from the 
17th century to the present. The course emphasizes the 
study and consideration of the literary, cultural, and human 
significance of selected great works of the Western and 
non-Western literary traditions, including women’s, minority, 
and ethnic literature from around the world. An important 
goal of the class is to promote an understanding of the 
works in their cultural/historical contexts and of the enduring 
human values which unite the different literary traditions. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
335

English (ENGL), continued
May be taken as Humanities credit for General Education 
Requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 or equivalent. This 
class is only offered in the fall semester (odd years). 
ENGL 2503 English Capstone (3-0-3)
The English Capstone course evaluates and strengthens 
literary, written, and oral presentation skills for students 
seeking an associate degree in English and/or intending 
to transfer to a 4-year English program. Course delivery 
methods include individual study with an English professor, 
small group study, and some lectures. This is a required 
course for an associate degree in English. Prerequisites: 
ENGL 2113 and 9 hours from ENGL 2213, 2223, 2313, or 2323. 
Engineering (ENGR)
ENGR 1213  Introduction to Engineering Practices (3-0-3)
Introduction to engineering principles and practices 
including methods of problem solving, case study analysis, 
presentation of engineering data, and the professional 
aspects of engineering. Teamwork will be emphasized with 
an open-ended design project. Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or 
equivalent.
ENGR 2013  Engineering Graphics & Design (2-3-3)
This course offers an overview of graphical communication 
for engineers and hands-on experience using parametric 
CAD software. The course concludes with an active learning 
approach to the Design Process where students apply the 
steps in the Design Process to create a solution for a real-
world problem using digital manufacturing. Prerequisite: 
student must be eligible to enroll in a college level math 
class.
ENGR 2091-6  Special Topics in Engineering (Variable)
Directed individual study of special topics and special 
courses in engineering to offer special engineering courses 
to Tinker AFB technical personnel and to other select groups 
of the community.
ENGR 2103  Statics (2-3-3)
Two- and 3-dimensional force systems, equivalent systems 
of forces, equilibrium of rigid bodies in 2 and 3 dimensions, 
centroids, moments of inertia, structures and frames, friction, 
virtual work. Prerequisites: MATH 2924 or concurrent 
enrollment, and PHYS 2434.
ENGR 2113  Dynamics (3-0-3) 
Equations of motion, Newton's Second Law, principles 
of work and energy and impulse and momentum in 
translation and rotation of rigid bodies, mechanical 
vibrations. Prerequisites: ENGR 2103 and MATH 2924. 
ENGR 2123  Statics & Dynamics (3-0-3) 
Statics: forces and moments; general 3-dimensional statically 
determinant frames and structures; centroids and moment 
of inertia of areas; moment of inertia of masses. Dynamics: 
rectilinear and curvilinear motion of a particle; Newton's 
laws of motion; principles of work and energy, impulse and 
momentum as applied to particles. Prerequisites: MATH 2924 
and PHYS 2434.
ENGR 2133  Strength of Materials (3-0-3) 
Elementary elasticity and Hooke's law; Poison's ratio; solution 
of elementary 1- and 2-dimensional statically indeterminate 
problems; stresses and strains induced by direct loading, 
bending and shearing; deflection of beams; area-moment 
and moment distribution; combined stresses; structural 
members of 2 materials; and columns. Prerequisites: ENGR 
2103 or ENGR 2123, and MATH 2924.
ENGR 2203  Digital Signals & Filtering (3-0-3)
A student of digital signals including: Sampling, Discrete 
Time Mathematics, Filter Design, and Spectral Analysis. 
The course will include the use of MATHLAB or other 
mathematical analysis software. Prerequisite: MATH 2924.
ENGR 2213  Electrical Science (3-0-3) 
A survey of electrical engineering techniques, methods, and 
problems associated with direct and alternating network 
theory, operation and application of electronic devices, 
transducers, and rotating machinery. Prerequisites: MATH 
2924 or concurrent enrollment, and PHYS 2444 or concurrent 
enrollment.
ENGR 2233  Fluid Mechanics (3-0-3) 
This course provides a foundation in mechanics as applied 
to fluids. Topics covered in this course include fluid statics, 
conservation equations applied to fluids, dimensional 
analysis, and the use of both internal and external viscous 
flow models. Prerequisites: MATH 2934 and ENGR 2103 or 
ENGR 2123.
ENGR 2303  Materials, Design, & Manufacturing 
Processes (3-0-3)
The structure and properties of materials relative to 
manufacturing processes will be studied. Additionally, the 
ultimate performance of products will be investigated. 
Casting, molding, forming, machining and joining processes 
will be studied. Course assignments and a design project will 
supplement class material. Prerequisite: PHYS 2434.
ENGR 2313  Engineering Thermodynamics (3-0-3) 
A study of the first and second laws of thermodynamics as 
applied to engineering problems and analysis. Prerequisites: 
MATH 2924, PHYS 2434, and either CHEM 1135 or CHEM 
1225.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
336

Engineering Technology (ENGT)
ENGT 1203  Technology Practices (3-3-3)
This course is designed as a dynamic lecture course that 
includes various hands-on activities to teach technology 
practices in the context of the responsibilities of technicians 
and technologists in the workplace. The basic tools of 
engineering 
technology, 
including 
problem 
solving, 
conversion of units, computer skills, and technical reporting, 
are explained. Mathematical concepts are presented to show 
the practical uses of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry. 
The broad spectrum of today’s technologies will be reviewed 
in relation to electronic and mechanical systems.
ENGT 1214  Introduction to Mechanical Systems (3-4-4)
A study of basic mechanical drive components such as gears, 
pulleys, belts, chains, and sprockets. Topics include the 
mechanical principles and applications of these devices and 
mechanical systems employing them. Prerequisite: MATH 
0144.
ENGT 1224  Mechanical Systems I (3-4-4)
A continuation of ENGT 1214 including cams, cam followers, 
levers, and linkages plus the combination of these devices 
with gears, pulleys, and sprockets to form complex mechanical 
systems. Prerequisite: ENGT 1214.
ENGT 1304  Introduction to Electronics (3-2-4) 
This course is for beginning students who are starting a 
career in the electronics field and for non-majors. This 
course will cover a wide range of electronic principle topics. 
Students apply the theoretical, fundamental concepts and 
demonstrate basic skills of electronics that involve direct 
current, alternate current, electronic components and use of 
basic test equipment. Prerequisite: MATH 1513.
ENGT 1314  Fundamentals of Electricity (3-2-4) 
The nature of electricity, Ohm's Law, series and parallel 
circuits; Kirchhoff's Laws, network theorems, magnetism, 
electromagnetic induction, and steady state and transient 
analysis of RC and RL circuits. Lab experience emphasizes 
use of test equipment and circuit hardware. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1513.
ENGT 1324  Circuit Analysis (3-2-4) 
The topics of study include the following: the response of 
resistive, inductive, and capacitive elements to sinusoidal 
voltages and currents; the use of complex numbers in the 
analysis of series, parallel, and series-parallel AC circuits 
with resistive, inductive, capacitive components; and the 
characteristics of AC power. The subjects of transformers, 
resonant circuits, passive filters, polyphase systems, and pulse 
waveforms will also be examined. Prerequisite: ENGT 1314. 
ENGT 1333  Electronic Devices & Amplifiers (2-2-3) 
The study of the various semiconductor diodes, bipolar 
junction transistors, field effect transistors, and PNPN devices. 
This study includes the characteristics, parameters, biasing, 
uses such as amplifiers, and basic circuit configurations for 
these devices. Prerequisites: ENGT 1314 and concurrent 
enrollment in ENGT 1324.
ENGT 1614  Advanced Design I (4-0-4)
This course will cover the theory and application of 
engineering drawing, sketching and block lettering, geometric 
construction; representation of normal, inclined oblique and 
cylindrical surfaces; standard, section and auxiliary views; 
dimensioning; and, an introduction to designing with a 
CAD® system. The student will also use engineering and 
mechanical scales and precision measuring instruments to 
measure sizes, lengths and locations of shapes and features. 
Mathematical concepts will also be presented to show 
the practical uses of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry. 
Prerequisite: Eligible to enroll in a college-level math class.
ENGT 1833  Introduction to Quality Assurance (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to teach the basic concepts and 
techniques of quality control, the application of these 
techniques to production problems, and the utilization of 
reference materials related to quality control.
ENGT 1842  Dimensional Metrology (2-0-2) 
A study of the science of dimensional metrology, systems 
of measurement, mechanical measurements, scaled 
instruments, reference planes, and calibration programs. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513.
ENGT 1853  Quality Planning & Analysis (3-0-3)
This course prepares the students in the basic fundamentals 
of organizing quality functions from development to customer 
usage based on managerial and engineering methodology. 
Vendor/customer relations and economic factors will also be 
discussed.
ENGT 2091-6  Special Topics in Engineering Technology 
(Variable) 
Individual topics of study dealing with specific areas of the 
engineering-related technologies. May be repeated for a 
maximum of 6 credit hours.
ENGT 2103 Additive Manufacturing (2-1-3)
This course is designed to teach the importance of additive 
manufacturing (a.k.a. 3D Printing) and its huge role in global 
product development and innovation. The student will 
develop a rich knowledge of 3D printing technologies, 
devices, capabilities, materials and applications. The student 
will also learn the trade-offs between various 3D printing 
processes and technologies, along with the various related 
software tools, process and techniques, such as 3D scanning, 
injection molding, and casting. Finally, the student will learn 
the latest trends and opportunities in 3D printing. Lab fee: $10.
ENGT 2123  Electromechanical Devices & Controls (2-2-3)
An introduction to electromechanical devices such as 
solenoids, relays, starters, switches, and motors. The course 
further includes the study of control devices, line diagrams, 
and wiring methods as used in motor control circuits. 
Prerequisites: MATH 1513 and ENGT 1324.
ENGT 2191-4  Engineering Technology Internship 
(Variable) 
A supervised on-the-job training experience in an appropriate 
business, industry, government agency, or institution. May be 
repeated for up to 12 hours credit. Prerequisites: Approval of 
Engineering and Science Division Dean and employer.
ENGT 2214  Mechanical Systems II (2-4-4) 
A study of factors influencing efficient manufacturing 
processes. Case histories are studied and philosophies of 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
337

Engineering Technology (ENGT), continued
manufacturing economics are debated. In support of lab 
exercises, jig and fixture design, process flow control, material 
handling, and management of resources are integrated 
with industrial robots and CNC machinery to provide the 
student with experience balancing the factors associated 
with manufacturing. Product research and original design are 
integrated with technical communications, both written and 
oral. Prerequisite: ENGT 1224.
ENGT 2224  Computer-Aided-Design/Computer-Aided 
Machining (CAD®/CAM®) (2-6-4) 
An introduction to current technology for producing CNC 
programs from SmartCAM®, AutoCAD®, Iges and/or CADkey® 
software. The student will download both graphically- and 
manually-produced programs to a floor-model CNC end-
mill and modify them to fulfill production specifications and 
requirements. Multiple part positioning and machine tooling 
are emphasized. Equipment is full-sized, metal is machined, 
multiple parts are produced, and close tolerances are 
required. If students desire to employ graphics other than 
SmartCAM, they must be proficient in the graphics version 
to be used.
ENGT 2614  Advanced Design II (4-0-4)
This course builds on the knowledge and skills acquired in 
Advanced Design I. A more intense study of engineering 
graphics and modeling techniques for product design and 
development will be covered. Topics cover include freehand 
sketching, geometrical construction, orthographic projection, 
visualization techniques, dimensioning and tolerancing, CAD® 
systems and an open-ended design project. Prerequisite: 
ENGT 1614.
ENGT 2803  Statistical Quality Control (3-0-3) 
This course introduces the student to fundamental concepts 
of statistical theory as applied to quality control techniques. 
Various acceptance sampling programs and control charts 
will be discussed. Prerequisite: MATH 2083.
ENGT 2823  Nondestructive Testing (3-0-3) 
This course introduces the student to various non-destructive 
testing methods for quality control purposes: liquid penetrant 
testing, magnetic testing, X-ray and isotope radiography, 
ultrasonic and eddy current tests.
ENGT 2833  Reliability Engineering Objectives (3-0-3)
The course introduces the student to the concepts of 
product reliability theory, statistical techniques, failure law, 
maintainability, design and systems analysis, vendor reliability 
control, reliability in production, and reliability program 
management. Prerequisites: ENGT 1833 and MATH 2083.
Environmental Science (ENSC)
ENSC 1101  Introduction to Environmental Science 
Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course introduces students to the wide range of 
environmental issues that are present in today’s world by 
utilizing a hands-on learning approach. This lab will examine 
the physical and ecological systems of the earth, their 
complex connections and patterns, and human interactions 
with the environment. Lab fee: $15.
ENSC 1103  Introduction to Environmental Science (3-0-3) 
Scientific study of interaction among organisms, including 
humankind, with each other and their physical environment 
including sustainable resource management and the impacts 
of human populations and activities.
ENSC 2113  Solid & Hazardous Wastes: Principles & 
Management (3-0-3) 
Introduction to the problems, regulations and techniques 
associated with the management of solid and hazardous 
waste to include composition, volume and characterization of 
the wastes. The course will cover the collection and disposal 
systems of solid and hazardous wastes, including landfills, 
solidification/stabilization and incineration.
ENSC 2123  Air Quality (3-0-3) 
This course is the study of air pollution; its public, 
legal, engineering, and scientific ramifications, and 
current methods of sampling, analysis, and evaluation. 
Prerequisite: ENSC 1103 or concurrent enrollment. 
ENSC 2191  Individual Studies (Variable)
Directed individual study of special projects and supervised 
on-the-job training in selected organizations, businesses, and 
institutions of appropriate interest. Prerequisite: ENSC 1103 or 
concurrent enrollment.
ENSC 2233  Water Resources (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the functional relationships of 
streams and lakes as they are affected by their physical, 
chemical and biotic environment. Increasing knowledge 
about the operational stream ecosystem and factors that 
regulate productivity of the total watershed are evaluated as 
well as impacts from human activities, including urban runoff, 
mining and agriculture. Students will select a stream/lake site 
to sample and analyze the water quality of the site throughout 
the semester. The legal framework for water pollution control 
in the United States is addressed via a review of the structure 
and requirements of the Clean Water Act and Safe Drinking 
Water Act. Prerequisite: ENSC 1103 or concurrent enrollment.
ENSC 2403  Industrial Hygiene Practices (3-0-3) 
Industrial Hygiene Practices provides students with an 
introduction to the field of industrial hygiene that includes 
anticipating, 
identifying, 
evaluating, 
and 
controlling 
health hazards. This course covers the basic concepts in 
threshold limits, dose response, and general recognition 
of occupational hazards, sample collection and evaluation 
methods. Prerequisite: ENSC 1103 or concurrent enrollment.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
338

Environmental Technology (ENVT)
NOTE: All ENVT courses are offered through the Professional 
Training Center, (405) 733-7488.
ENVT 1111  D-Level Water Operator (1-0-1)
This course covers all aspects of Basic "D"-level operations for 
water operators. Material and studies include: basics of water 
treatment, characteristics of water, general regulations and 
management, reservoir management and intake structures, 
coagulation and sedimentation, filtration, disinfection, 
supplemental treatment, ground water systems, distribution 
systems, maintenance, and operator safety.
ENVT 1121  D-Level Wastewater Operator (1-0-1)
This course covers all aspects of Basic "D"-level operations 
for wastewater operators. Material and studies include: 
basics of wastewater treatment, characteristics of wastewater, 
general regulations and management, collection systems, 
maintenance, operator safety, preliminary and primary 
treatment, secondary treatment, advanced treatment (tertiary 
treatment), sludge digestion and solids handling, wastewater 
treatment ponds, and disinfection.
ENVT 1211  C-Level Water Operator (1-0-1)
This course covers all aspects of intermediate "C"-level 
operations for water operators. Material and studies include: 
basics of water treatment, characteristics of water, general 
regulations and management, reservoir management and 
intake structures, coagulation and sedimentation, filtration, 
disinfection, supplemental treatment, ground water systems, 
distribution systems, maintenance, and operator safety.
ENVT 1221  C-Level Wastewater Operator (1-0-1)
This course covers all aspects of intermediate "C"-level 
operations for wastewater operators. Material and studies 
include: basics of wastewater treatment, characteristics of 
wastewater, general regulations and management, collection 
systems, maintenance, operator safety, preliminary and 
primary treatment, secondary treatment, advanced treatment 
(tertiary treatment), sludge digestion and solids handling, 
wastewater treatment ponds, and disinfection.
ENVT 1231  C-Level Water Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills 
necessary to attain a "C" water lab technician license. Water 
treatment processes cannot be effectively controlled unless 
the operator has some means to check and evaluate the 
quality of water being treated and produced. By relating lab 
results to treatment plant operators, the system can function 
efficiently and safely. Parameters and testing procedures for 
alkalinity, hardness, chlorine residual, general lab safety and 
practices, jar tests, lab glassware, metric system, pH, quality 
assurance, standard solutions, and turbidity are the main 
topics discussed in lecture and demonstration.
ENVT 1241  C-Level Wastewater Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills necessary 
to attain a "C" wastewater lab technician license. Wastewater 
treatment processes cannot be effectively controlled unless 
the operator has some means to check and evaluate the 
quality of wastewater being treated and produced. By 
relating lab results to treatment plant operators, the system 
can function efficiently and safely. Parameters and testing 
procedures for: alkalinity, biochemical oxygen demand, 
dissolved oxygen, general lab glassware, metric system, pH, 
quality assurance, seeded B.O.D. tests, solids analysis, and 
standard solutions are the main topics discussed in lecture 
and demonstration.
ENVT 2091-7  Special Topics in Environmental Technology 
(Variable) 
Special courses and workshops dealing with specific areas 
of environmental technology, especially water/wastewater 
technology. Lab fee: $10.
ENVT 2312  B-Level Water Operator (2-0-2)
This course covers all aspects of advanced "B"-level 
operations for water operators. Material and studies include: 
basics of water treatment, characteristics of water, general 
regulations and management, reservoir management and 
intake structures, coagulation and sedimentation, filtration, 
disinfection, supplemental treatment, ground water systems, 
distribution systems, maintenance, and operator safety.
ENVT 2322  B-Level Wastewater Operator (2-0-2)
This course covers all aspects of intermediate "B"-level 
operations for wastewater operators. Material and studies 
include: basics of wastewater treatment, characteristics of 
wastewater, general regulations and management, collection 
systems, maintenance, operator safety, preliminary and 
primary treatment, secondary treatment, advanced treatment 
(tertiary treatment), sludge digestion and solids handling, 
wastewater treatment ponds, and disinfection.
ENVT 2331  B-Level Water Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills necessary 
to attain a "B" water lab operator. Water treatment processes 
cannot be effectively controlled unless the operator has 
some means to check and evaluate the quality of water being 
treated and produced. By relating lab results to treatment 
plant operators the system can function efficiently and 
safely. Parameters and testing procedures for: metric system, 
laboratory, glassware, quality assurance, standard solutions, 
alkalinity, pH, turbidity, DPD Colorimetric Chlorine Test, 
Calcium Carbonate Stability Test, Membrane Filtration Test, 
Coliform Test, EDTA Test For Hardness, NBS Thermometer, 
lab technician rules and regulations, and lab safety are the 
main topics discussed in lecture and demonstration.
ENVT 2341  B-Level Wastewater Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills necessary 
to attain a "B" wastewater lab technician license. Wastewater 
treatment processes cannot be effectively controlled unless 
the operator has some means to check and evaluate the 
quality of water being treated and produced. By relating lab 
results to treatment plant operators the system can function 
efficiently and safely. Parameters and testing procedures 
for coliform bacteria, general lab practices, lab safety, solids 
analysis, biochemical oxygen demand, dissolved oxygen, pH, 
alkalinity, standard solutions, quality assurance, wastewater 
lab glassware, and metric systems are subjects discussed in 
lecture and demonstration.
ENVT 2412  A-Level Water Operator (2-0-2)
This course covers all aspects of advanced "A"-level 
operations for water operators. Material and studies include: 
basics of water treatment, characteristics of water, general 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
339

Environmental Technology (ENVT), continued
regulations and management, reservoir management and 
intake structures, coagulation and sedimentation, filtration, 
disinfection, supplemental treatment, ground water systems, 
distribution systems, maintenance, and operator safety.
ENVT 2422  A-Level Wastewater Operator (2-0-2)
This course covers all aspects of advanced "A"-level 
operations for wastewater operators. Material and studies 
include: basics of wastewater treatment, characteristics of 
wastewater, general regulations and management, collection 
systems, maintenance, operator safety, preliminary and 
primary treatment, secondary treatment, advanced treatment 
(tertiary treatment) sludge digestion and solids handling, 
wastewater treatment ponds, and disinfection.
ENVT 2431  A-Level Water Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills 
necessary to attain an "A" water lab operator certificate. Water 
treatment processes cannot be effectively controlled unless 
the operator has some means to check and evaluate the 
quality of water being treated and produced. By relating lab 
results to treatment plant operators, the system can function 
efficiently and safely. Parameters and testing procedures 
for metric system, laboratory, glassware, quality assurance, 
standard solutions, alkalinity, pH, turbidity, DPD Colorimetric 
Chlorine Test, Calcium Carbonate Stability Test, Membrane 
Filtration Test, Coliform Test, EDTA Test for Hardness, NBS 
Thermometer, lab technician rules and regulations and 
Laboratory Safety Gas Chromatography, Electrothermal 
Atomic Absorption, iron and manganese, reagent analysis, 
and total coliform tests are the main topics discussed in 
lecture and demonstration.
ENVT 2441  A-Level Wastewater Laboratory (0-2-1)
This course is designed to train a person in lab skills necessary 
to attain an "A" water lab technician license. Wastewater 
treatment processes cannot be effectively controlled unless 
the operator has some means to check and evaluate the 
quality of water being treated and produced. By relating lab 
results to treatment plant operators, the system can function 
efficiently and safely.
ENVT 2532  B/A Water Operator Management (2-0-2)
This course is a detailed and very intensive course involving 
management of multi-million dollar facilities and personnel. 
Managers must be proficient in budgeting for water and 
wastewater capital improvements, discharge regulation 
(OPDES) permits, safe drinking water standards, public 
relations, federal grant proposals, etc. These items are 
covered along with many real life scenarios and situations. 
A wide variety of managed personnel are employed around 
very dangerous equipment. All must comply with the 
Department of Labor standards and practices. Management 
of safety programs is stressed.
French (FREN)
FREN 1115  Elementary French I (5-0-5) 
This course is an introduction to the French language. Through 
study of French grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation, this 
course emphasizes the development of speaking, writing, 
reading, and understanding the language at a novice level 
while developing an appreciation of life in France as well 
as other Francophone nations. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or 
concurrent enrollment. This class is only offered in the fall 
semester.
FREN 1225  Elementary French II (5-0-5)
This course is a continuation of Elementary French I. Through 
study of French grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation, this 
course emphasizes the continuing development of speaking, 
writing, reading, and understanding the language at a novice 
level while developing an appreciation of life in France as 
well as other Francophone nations.  Prerequisite:  FREN 1115. 
This class is only offered in the spring semester.
FREN 2091-3  Special Topics in French (Variable) 
Directed individual or class study of special topics in French. 
May be repeated with different topics. Permission of professor 
required.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
340

Family Services & Child Development (FSCD)
FSCD 1213  Introduction to Family Services/Child 
Development (FSCD) (3-0-3)
Introduction to Family Services/Child Development (FSCD) 
provides students with an overview of early care and education 
programs, and an introduction to the developmental and 
individual needs of children ages birth through eight. This 
course will present the major theories in child development 
and the application of those theories in child care and 
preschool settings. The theorists discussed include but are 
not limited to Piaget, Erikson, Bandura, Montessori, Vygotsky, 
and Dewey. Throughout the course, students will gain an 
understanding of the standards and practice of professional 
development. Students will also identify possible careers in 
Family Services/Child Development and research relevant 
and appropriate professional organizations. 
FSCD 1313  Health, Safety, & Nutrition for Families & 
Children (3-0-3)
This course will help students develop an understanding of 
the theory and practices for development of positive health, 
safety, and nutrition practices with families and children. 
The course will focus on application of these principles and 
practices with young children in group care and methods for 
teaching health, safety, and nutrition to children and to family 
members.
FSCD 1323 Developmentally Appropriate Practices & 
Environments (3-0-3)
In this course, students will study the principles of 
developmentally appropriate practice as they relate to the 
implementation of child development curricula and room 
arrangement. Included in this course are the opportunities 
for the student to identify the concept areas of the Oklahoma 
Early Learning Guidelines. Students will intentionally set up 
engaging and appropriately challenging early childhood 
learning environments. This course will address the principles 
of environmental design and the integration of curriculum 
within various designs. Furthermore, students will focus 
on the importance of a play-based curriculum and how to 
create, maintain, and enrich indoor and outdoor learning 
environments for young children.
FSCD 2091-3  Special Topics in Family Services & Child 
Development (Variable)
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in child 
development. Topics to be determined by the program 
needs of students. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 
credit hours. Permission of professor required. 
FSCD 2213  Curriculum Planning (3-0-3)
This course focuses on planning, designing, and 
implementing effective early childhood curriculum for ages 
3 through 8. Students clearly see what can be taught to 
young children, why it is important, and how it can be 
accomplished. The emphasis is on the importance of a child-
centered curriculum that encompasses the whole child—
physical, social, emotional, creative, and cognitive—and 
the focus is on the developmental needs of the children in 
the classroom, the cognitive areas of the curriculum, and 
effective methods of curriculum implementation. Students 
will learn a comprehensive, cohesive approach to curriculum 
development, which results in greater continuity for children 
and practitioners in group settings in childcare, preschool, 
and early elementary grades. Prerequisite: FSCD 1323. This 
course is only offered in the spring semester.
FSCD 2223  Language and Literacy (3-0-3)
This course focuses on research-based principles and 
practices for providing young children ages birth through 
eight with a strong foundation in language and literacy, using 
a developmentally appropriate approach. Students will focus 
on the study of theories, methods, and materials as well as 
instructional techniques related to children’s language and 
literacy development, including oral language, writing, and 
reading. This course is only offered in the fall semester.
FSCD 2233  Practicum in Family Services & Child 
Development (1-4-3) 
This course addresses the practical application of evidence-
based practices based on early childhood education/
family services principles and theories. Students work with 
diverse young children and families in high-quality, culturally, 
linguistically, and ability diverse early childhood/family 
services settings under the supervision of a site supervisor 
and a college coursework supervisor. Before beginning 
professor-approved supervised field experiences, students 
must complete and pass an OSBI Background Check and 
drug screening test. These 2 requirements will be at cost to 
the student. Permission of professor required. This course is 
only offered in the spring semester.
FSCD 2333  Families & Substance Abuse (3-0-3)
Families and Substance Abuse is a course in which the 
student examines the family as a social institution and the 
influences that substance abuse has on the institution. Major 
emphasis is placed on theoretical models of substance 
abuse, social and historical context of substance abuse, 
legal aspects of drug abuse, and issues that typically exist in 
families dealing with substance abuse. Crosslisted with SOC 
2333. Prerequisite: SOC 1113.
FSCD 2403  The Family in Society (3-0-3)
This course will focus on the family as a social institution. 
It will provide a historical and multi-cultural overview of 
the family, as well as address the many issues facing and 
redefining the modern family. Throughout the duration of the 
course, students will examine the relationship between social 
inequality and the family with a particular focus on gender 
inequality, the current parameters of family roles, and the 
impact of social class, race, and ethnicity. Crosslisted with 
SOC 2403. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 and SOC 1113.
FSCD 2433  Observing & Assessing Human Behavior (2-1-3)
This course explores various methods used to document and 
evaluate the development of young children (infants through 
8 years old) in structured and unstructured situations. FSCD/
PSYC 2433 will highlight the value of keen observation in 
order to record and assess the social, physical, language, 
intellectual, creative and emotional development in young 
children. Ethics, confidentiality, teacher accountability, family 
communication, portfolio organization, developmental 
milestones, the process of identifying individual strengths 
and challenges are some of the topics that will be addressed. 
Supervised field observation experiences are mandatory. 
Before beginning professor-approved supervised field 
observation experiences, students must complete and pass 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
341

Family Services and Child Development (FSCD), continued
Film Studies & Digital Media (FSDM)
an OSBI Background Check and drug screening test. These 
2 requirements will be at cost to the student. Crosslisted with 
PSYC 2433. Permission of professor required. This course is 
only offered in the fall semester.
FSCD 2463  Understanding Child Abuse & Neglect (3-0-3)
The purpose of this course is to provide a general 
introduction to the topic of child welfare, including abuse 
and neglect. The student will be given information about 
how children have been viewed throughout history and 
within various cultural contexts. The student will learn 
about the various methods of child welfare, intervention 
and prevention strategies, and how the social services 
systems response to child abuse and neglect has evolved. 
Crosslisted with SOC 2463. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. 
FSCD  2523 Child Growth & Development (3-0-3) 
Growth and development of the child from conception 
through adolescence. Includes roles and responsibilities 
of parenthood, physical growth, intellectual growth, 
personality development, societal and family adjustment, 
and 
communication. 
Crosslisted 
with 
PSYC 
2523. 
 
FSCD 2533  Guidance of Young Children (3-0-3)
A course to promote understanding and application of the 
principles and techniques of guidance with children in group 
and individual settings. General understanding of behavior 
patterns of children, methods of guiding and directing 
children's behavior patterns and activities for positive growth 
and development. Prerequisite or corequisite: ENGL 1113.
FSCD 2573  Family, School & Community Relations (3-0-3)
This course will deal with family, school, and community 
issues as they relate to children up to age 10 and their 
families. This course will enable students to develop the 
skills and techniques for working with parents and school 
and community services. Included will be an historical 
overview of family life and parent involvement, characteristics 
of families in today’s society, effective communications 
with families, schools and home-based programs for 
families, and services for families with special needs. 
FSCD 2613  Infant/Toddler Programs (3-0-3)
This course will enable students to develop the knowledge 
and skills necessary to work with children from birth to 2 
1/2 years of age. Emphasis is on infant and toddler growth 
and development, activity planning, and a developmentally 
appropriate environment. This course is only offered in the 
spring semester.
FSCD 2633  Administration in Family Services & Child 
Development Programs (3-0-3)
This course will enable students to develop the knowledge 
and skills necessary to manage and/or direct a program 
for children and for families. The course includes policy 
making, budgeting, personnel management, evaluation, 
staff development, facilities and equipment, regulations, and 
types of program accreditations. This course is only offered 
in the spring semester.
FSDM 1103  Production Design (3-0-3)
Principles of constructing, rigging, painting, and assembling 
modern stage scenery and equipment.  Requires 16 laboratory 
hours which includes some evenings and weekends.  This 
course is offered every fall semester.  This course is cross-
listed with TH 1103.  
FSDM 1213  Directing & Media Aesthetics (3-0-3)
A basic introduction to principles of directing and the art 
of film and media aesthetics.  This course will introduce, 
examine, and demonstrate both the theoretical discussion 
and practical application of filmmaking techniques and 
concepts:  composition, time, space, motion, light, color, 
sound, and editing.
FSDM 1223  Basic Editing (3-0-3)
Students will gain on-hands experience with non-linear 
editing software for digital video and audio by working with 
multiple video and audio tracks, scene building, and timeline 
maintenance.  Students will learn to use basic transitions as 
well as the history and theory behind editing techniques and 
methods.  Basic techniques and methods for digital effects 
will also be introduced.  There will be a lab fee of $10.00.
FSDM 1313  Cinematography (3-0-3)
Cinematography will provide a theoretical backdrop to 
inform technical application of camerawork and lighting for 
professional film and digital video production.  Students 
will engage with artistic theories of composition, setting, 
movement, and light, and students will learn how to operate 
consumer, pro-sumer, and professional camera equipment.
FSDM 1413  Sound Design and Editing (3-1-3)
In Sound Design and Editing, students will demonstrate 
the aesthetic and technical skills for production and 
postproduction sound for use in cinematic and digital 
content.  Students will gain experience with microphones, 
sound design, volume, recording techniques for on-location 
and studio settings as well as post-production editing and 
mixing software and methods.  Student will produce a short 
film or video work with an emphasis on sound design theory 
and practice.
FSDM 1833  Film History (3-0-3)
The course will explore the international history of film from 
the early years of the artform to modern filmmaking practices.  
Students will demonstrate an understanding of technological, 
socio-historical, and cultural influences on different films, 
directors, and audiences.  This course can be taken for 
General Humanities credit.
FSDM 1913  Classical Hollywood Cinema (3-0-3)
This course will provide students the opportunity to 
experience, assess, analyze, and critique the Classical 
Hollywood style of filmmaking up until its end and determine 
its continued influences on modern Hollywood production.  
Students will engage in discussion with filmic texts and about 
filmic text.  This course can be taken for General Humanities 
credit.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
342

Geology (GEOL)
GEOL 1114  Physical Geology (3-2-4)
Study of the composition of the earth and the modification 
of its surface by internal and external processes. Includes 
examination of the Earth's interior, magnetism, gravity, 
position in space, minerals, rocks, structures, and geological 
processes. Field trip required. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: 
MATH 0144 or equivalent.
GEOL 1124  Historical Geology (3-3-4)
Study of the geologic history of the earth including the 
processes involved in the formation of the continents and 
oceans. The relationships of continents and oceans to 
the origin and evolution of life are examined within a time 
perspective. A field trip is required. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: 
GEOL 1114 or concurrent enrollment.
GEOL 2091-6  Special Topics in Geology (Variable)
Study of special topics and special interest courses in 
geology. These courses offer special instruction in current 
topics in geology. May consist of specialized geology courses 
offered to technical personnel of area companies, agencies, 
or other select groups in the community. Lecture and lab 
hours variable. 
GEOL 2324  Rocks & Minerals (3-1-4)
The geologic study of mineral formulas, optics, systematic 
mineralogy, stability and solutions, and point-group symmetry 
and x-ray diffraction. Prerequisites: C or better in CHEM 1135 
and MATH 1914, and completion of GEOL 1114 or GEOL 1124.
 
GEOG 1103  Elements of Human Geography (3-0-3)
A study of the earth as the home of human beings, including 
such factors as land forms, climate, minerals, economics, 
regions, water, population, and cultural patterns of the world.
GEOG 1114  Physical Geography (3-2-4)
This course offers a systematic introduction to the physical 
earth, including earth materials, landform processes, and 
resultant landforms. Topics of analysis include maps and 
globes, earth/sun relationships, climate and weather, and the 
shaping of landforms. Human interactions and impacts on the 
local, regional, and global environment are also discussed. 
During the lab, students complete exercises requiring “hands-
on” use of geographical tools of interpretation.  Cross-listed 
with PHSC 1114. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: MATH 0124. 
GEOG 2443  World Regional Geography (3-0-3)
A study of the world's major geographic regions integrating 
the components of the political, historic, economic, social, 
and physical environments.
Geography (GEOG)
FSDM 2091-3  Special Topics in Film (Variable)
The Special Topics in Film course will provide students an 
opportunity to experience, interact, create, analyze, and/
or critique different modes of film production, genre, style, 
and/or content.  Course subject material will vary between 
offerings.
FSDM 2223  Advanced Editing & After Effects (0-3-3)
Advanced Editing & After Effects extends the knowledge and 
practical skills acquired in the Basic Editing course.  Students 
will work with the processes of adding digital effects and 
finalizing a production for screening or online publication.  
Prerequisite:  FSDM 1223 Basic Editing.  There will be a lab 
fee of $10.00 for this course.
FSDM 2503  Production I (3-0-3)
Basic techniques for planning, shooting and editing of 
audio, video and online media.  Coursework features field 
camera operation, audio and video recording, basic lighting 
techniques, and computer editing of audio and video media, 
as well as following a basic script.  Course includes a 
laboratory component.  Lab fee:  $10.00.  This course is only 
offered during the fall semester each academic year.  This 
course will be cross-listed with MCOM 2503 and MULT 2503.
FSDM 2543  Production II (0-3-3)
Production II expands on the basic techniques from MCOM 
2503/MULT 2503/FSDM 1503.  Coursework will expand field 
experience with camera operations with more professional 
equipment, audio and video recording, lighting, and editing.  
Students will produce a longer-form narrative or documentary 
feature that is 10-15 minutes in length.  Lab fee: $10.00.  This 
course is offered only during the Spring semester each year. 
Prerequisites:  MCOM 2503, MULT 2503, or FSDM 2503.
FSDM 2913  Capstone in Film Studies (0-3-3)
Capstone in Film Studies serves as the program outcomes 
assessment.  Students can enroll in this course during 
the semester they plan to graduate.  Students, as a group 
or individually, will produce a short 15-30 minute feature 
narrative or documentary film.  Prerequisite:  FSDM 2543, 
FSDM 1103, MCOM 2093, FSDM 1213, FSDM 1313, and FSDM 
1223.
FSDM 2923  Capstone in Digital Media (0-3-3)
Capstone in Digital Media serves as the program outcomes 
assessment.  Students can enroll in this course during the 
semester they plan to graduate.  Students will prepare and 
present a portfolio of work created through the program 
and develop a group digital media project.  All projects 
can include any combination of video, digital photography, 
animation, computer graphics and design, and/or digitally 
created print media.  Prerequisites:  FSDM 2543, FSDM 1103, 
MCOM 2093, FSDM 1213, FSDM 1313 and FSDM 1223.
Film Studies & Digital Media (FSDM), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
343

GEOL 2424 Sedimentology & Stratigraphy (3-1-4)
An advanced course that focuses on sedimentary processes, 
sedimentary rock formation, and stratigraphic interpretation 
of sedimentary sequences. Prerequisites: GEOL 1114 or 
GEOL 1124 & GEOL 2324 or permission of professor. 
GEOL 2464   Soil Science Fundamentals (3-1-4)
An introduction to the chemical, physical, geological and 
environmental properties of soils. The classification, origins, 
distributions and morphology of soils and their influence on 
the ecosystem will also be addressed.
GEOL 2801  Capstone (1-0-1)
The capstone course integrates learning from the courses 
in the major with the courses from the rest of the academic 
experience. It requires the application of that learning to 
a project which serves as an instrument of evaluation. 
The project may include: 1) an internship approved by the 
professor; 2) a discussion of modern topics of interest in the 
Geosciences, or 3) a research paper on a professor-approved 
topic related to the Geosciences. Prerequisite: GEOL 2002 
and permission of professor. 
Geology (GEOL), continued
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
GIS 1113  Introduction to Geographic Information 
Systems (3-0-3)
An introduction to Geographic Information Systems and 
their applications. Emphasizes the concepts needed to 
use GIS effectively for manipulating, querying, analyzing, 
and visualizing spatial-based data. Industry-standard GIS 
software is used to analyze spatial patterns in meteorological, 
geological, environmental, and other applications data, and 
to generate cartographic output from the analysis.  Lab fee: 
$15.
German (GERM)
GERM 1115  Elementary German I (5-0-5) 
This course is an introduction to the German language. 
Through study of German grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation, this course emphasizes the development of 
speaking, writing, reading, and understanding the language 
at a novice level while developing an appreciation of life in 
Germany. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or concurrent enrollment. 
This class is only offered in the fall semester.
GERM 1225  Elementary German II (5-0-5) 
This course is a continuation of Elementary German I. Through 
study of German grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation, 
this course emphasizes the continuing development of 
speaking, writing, reading, and understanding the language 
at a novice level while developing an appreciation of life in 
Germany.  Prerequisite:  GERM 1115. This class is only offered 
in the spring semester.
GERM 2091-3  Special Topics in German (Variable)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in German. 
May be repeated with different topics. Permission of professor 
required.
Human Environmental Sciences (HES)
HES 2091-3  Special Topics in Home Economics (Variable) 
Directed individual study of class in specific topics in Human 
Environmental Sciences. Topics to be determined by the 
program needs of students. May be repeated for a maximum 
of 3 credit hours. Permission of professor required. 
HES 2323  Nutrition (3-0-3)  
Nutrition is the study of nutrients in foods in relation to the 
physical development and health of a normal healthy person. 
Included is diet therapy needed during medical conditions 
that require specific dietary care.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
344

History (HIST)
HIST 1013  World History I (3-0-3)
This course introduces students to political, social, and 
cultural connections and developments in non-Western 
civilizations from antiquity to the age of discovery. This 
course is only offered in the fall semester.
HIST 1023 World History II (3-0-3)
This course introduces students to political, social, and 
cultural connections and developments in non-Western 
civilizations from the age of discovery to the present. This 
course is only offered in the spring semester.
HIST 1113  Survey of East Asia, China, Japan, and Korea 
(3-0-3) 
This is a general introduction to the history of East Asia that 
addresses China, Japan, and Korea.  The time span covered 
extends from the Neolithic period to the modern era.  Students 
will learn about major trends in the imperial courts and how 
Confucianism and Legalism are used to establish a web of 
influential relationships, cultural shifts in immigration and how 
it impacts regional identity, and intellectual explorations of 
the Dao and Buddhism, and cultural commonality that binds 
them in tangential ways.  Through the examination of the 
history and dynamics of East Asia, students will learn how 
these nations formed into independent states and yet retain 
a common history.
HIST 1203  African American History (3-0-3) 
This course is a survey of African-American history from the 
colonial period to the present. May be taken as Humanities 
credit for General Education requirement.
HIST 1413  Ancient & Medieval Civilization (3-0-3) 
A survey of Western Civilization to about 1350 A.D. covering 
early human history, the civilization of the Ancient Near-East, 
Greece, and Rome, and the Middle Ages. May be taken as 
Humanities credit for General Education requirements.
HIST 1423  Europe: Renaissance to Waterloo (3-0-3) 
A survey of Europe in the early modern period from about 1450 
to the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815. May be taken 
as Humanities credit for General Education requirements.
 
HIST 1433  Revolutionary Europe 1815-Present (3-0-3) 
A survey of Europe from the end of the French Revolution 
to the turn of the 21st century. May be taken as Humanities 
credit for General Education requirements. This course is 
only offered in the spring semester.
HIST 1483  U.S. History to 1877 (3-0-3) 
This course is a general survey of American history from the 
colonial period to 1877.
 
HIST 1493  U.S. History Since 1877 (3-0-3) 
This course is a general survey of American history from 1877 
to the present.
HIST 2023  History of the Present (3-0-3) 
This course will study history through the lens of current 
events and contemporary issues. Areas covered will vary, 
based on the instructor's expertise, to include topics like 
race, politics, sports, geography, religion, food, environment, 
immigration, mass incarceration, and/or globalization, among 
others. The goal of this course is to provide the historical 
context and agency for contemporary events and issues. 
Contact the History Department for specific information for 
the upcoming semester. 
HIST 2091-3  Special Topics in History (Variable) 
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in History. 
Topics to be determined by the program needs of student. 
May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credit hours. Permission 
of professor required.
HIST 2123  Aviation History (3-0-3) 
This course chronicles the history of aviation through 
an in-depth study of powered flight and focus on the 
development of civil, commercial, and military aviation.  
Covers significant events and people throughout aviation 
history from the first powered flight through present day 
developments and a brief look into the future.  Also examines 
the impact of aviation on recreation, transportation, warfare, 
and exploration.  Cross-listed with AVI 2123.
HIST 2133  Women’s History (3-0-3)
This course explores the significant contributions and events 
in U.S. women’s history from the pre-colonial period to the 
present. May be taken as Humanities credit for General 
Education requirements.
HIST 2243  Hitler & Nazi Germany (3-0-3)
This course examines the evolution of Germany into a fascist 
state under the leadership of Adolf Hitler and the catastrophic 
consequences of  the Third Reich.  Course components will focus 
on the rise of the Nazi party, Anti-Semitism, World War II and the 
Holocaust. This course is only offered in the spring semester. 
HIST 2303  History of Oklahoma (3-0-3) 
A survey of Oklahoma's development from prehistorical times 
to the present. This course is only offered in the fall semester.
HIST 2383  Power, Mobilization, and Revolution (3-0-3) 
This course examines the roles that power structures, forces 
of mobilization, and revolutionary dynamics have played 
in the development of mass political movements across 
time and space. Topics will include revolutionary uprisings, 
radical political philosophies, civil rights issues, and the 
maturation of sociopolitical interest groups. The curriculum 
will encourage students to think critically and creatively 
about political institutions in order to understand what 
motivated revolutionary behavior; to explore how political 
reform movements lived and died in relation to the political 
systems in which they operated; and evaluate complex social 
and political phenomena and their changes over time. Cross-
listed with POLS 2383. 
HIST 2503 American Indian History (3-0-3) 
This survey  of American Indian people in North America 
assesses their role in shaping American history from pre-
contact to the present. An emphasis will be placed upon how 
cultural values influenced Indian-European interactions, U.S. 
Indian policies, and how native cultures adapted over time. 
May be taken as Humanities credit for General Education 
requirement. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
345

History (HIST), continued
HIST 2583  Introduction to LGBTQ+ History (3-0-3)
This course traces the contributions of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender and queer/questioning Americans to the larger 
historical narrative of the United States from the colonial 
period to the present. May be taken as Humanities credit for 
General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. 
This course is only offered in the fall semester.
HIST 2983  Historical Thinking (3-0-3)
This course will introduce students to the formative and 
creative tenets of the historical craft – developing research 
questions to significant problems, locating and evaluating 
primary and secondary sources, constructing arguments, 
and manipulating thesis-driven materials.  It is intended 
for students who anticipate transferring into the teacher 
education programs at four-year institutions and eventually 
teaching in Oklahoma secondary schools.  Prerequiste: 
ENGL 1113 and strongly suggest ENGL 1213.
HPER 1102  First Aid (2-0-2) 
This course is designed to provide the citizen responder with 
the knowledge and skills necessary in an emergency to help 
sustain life and minimize pain related to the consequences of 
injury or sudden illness until medical help arrives. The course 
content and activities will prepare participants to recognize 
emergencies and make appropriate decisions for first aid 
care. This course also emphasizes prevention of injuries and 
illness, with a focus on personal safety and health.
HPER 1113  First Aid/First Responder (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to provide the professional rescuer, 
those who have a duty to respond in emergency situations 
(first responders) with the knowledge and skills necessary in 
an emergency to help sustain life, reduce pain, and minimize 
the consequences of respiratory, cardiac emergencies, 
injuries and/or sudden illness until more advanced medical 
help can arrive. The course content will prepare students 
to make appropriate decisions about the care to provide 
in an emergency. This course will meet the CLEET First Aid 
objectives for students in the CJ/COP program.
HPER 1202  Health & Wellness (2-0-2) 
This course introduces concepts which can lead to optimal 
health. It presents principles of good health and knowledge 
which can affect behavior patterns that lead to a healthy 
lifestyle.
HPER 1213  Introduction to Health & Sports Sciences (3-0-3)
This course is designed to introduce to potential majors in 
HPER the following: the history and philosophy of HPER, 
social foundations of physical education and sport, scientific 
foundations, career planning, the nature and people of HPER 
and contemporary issues. In addition this course also gives 
comprehensive standards and guidelines for the quality 
design and operation of health and fitness facilities. For HPER 
majors, this course must be taken before or concurrently 
with the courses listed under Program Requirements on the 
degree sheet.
HPER 1222  Concepts of Fitness (2-0-2) 
Theory and practice of basic health and skill related aspects 
of fitness. Included in coursework are evaluations of personal 
fitness levels of cardiovascular endurance, body composition, 
muscle strength, muscle endurance and flexibility. Other 
topics include training principles, nutrition, stress, back 
pain and exercises to avoid. Prerequisite/corequisite: HPER 
1213. This course is only offered in the spring semester. 
HPER 1301  Physical Education Participation (0-2-1)
Instruction in various skill related and/or health related 
movement activities. Lab includes directed physical activity 
to improve one's skill and health aspects of fitness. Each 
activity will be specified in the class schedule for each 
semester. Fee: $10.
HPER 1311  Beginning Swimming (0-2-1)
This course will integrate the skills related to the diverse 
activities in the water with a common theme of safety, in, 
on, and around the water and to provide the student with 
information and resources to make participation in aquatic 
activities a lifetime pursuit. Fee: $10.
HPER 1321  Intermediate Swimming (0-2-1)
This course will integrate the skills related to the diverse 
activities in the water with a common theme of safety in, 
on, and around the water and to provide the student with 
information and resources to make participation in aquatic 
activities a lifetime pursuit. Fee: $10.
HPER 1331  Aquatic Fitness (0-2-1)
An exercise class designed to utilize the water's natural 
resistance and buoyancy to improve the student's 
cardiovascular endurance and muscular endurance and 
strength in a vertical position in shallow and deep depths. 
Swimming skills are not a requirement. Use of flotation and 
resistive devices may be incorporated but is optional. Fee: 
$10.
HPER 1351  Tennis (0-2-1)
This course will emphasize the development of the 
fundamental skills of tennis. Rules, terminology and etiquette 
will also be discussed. Racquet and balls will be provided. 
(Student may use his/her own personal racquet.) Fee: $10.
HPER 1361  Beginning Volleyball (0-2-1)
This course is designed to teach anyone with an interest in 
the game, the proper skills and fundamentals. This course 
will allow them to practice and develop those skills through 
the repetition of drills and game situations. The proficiency 
of these skills can be used to help individuals better enjoy a 
lifetime activity. Fee: $10.
Health, Physical Education & Recreation (HPER)
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
346

Health, Physical Education & Recreation (HPER), continued
HPER 1371  Intermediate Volleyball (0-2-1)
The Intermediate Volleyball course is designed for the more 
serious player, to take each individual a step beyond the 
beginning volleyball course. This course will help each player 
develop their individual skills and teach them more team 
aspects of the game. Fee: $10.
HPER 1391  Weight/Resistance Training (0-2-1)
Students will gain a working knowledge of weight/resistance 
training principles and their application. This may include the 
proper use of free weights, tubing, calisthenics, exercise balls, 
medicine balls, stabilization training and weight machines. 
Fee: $10.
HPER 1401  Group/Cardio Fitness (0-2-1)
Group/Cardio Fitness classes combine a variety of 
movements choreographed into a set of routines that improve 
cardiovascular endurance, coordination, and rhythm. Some 
class sets may include step benches and routines to improve 
muscular endurance (toning) and flexibility. Fee: $10.
HPER 1411  Pilates (0-2-1)
An exercise class based on the teachings of Joseph Pilates 
designed to improve the students' core strength, balance and 
coordination, and flexibility through a series of exercise to 
music. Resistive equipment such as tubing bands or balls may 
be used. Each student is encouraged to exercise at his/her 
own ability to achieve improved overall fitness, establishing 
a foundation toward a healthy lifestyle and improves self-
esteem and self-confidence. Fee: $10.
HPER 1421  H2O Strength Training (0-2-1)
This class is designed to use the resistive and buoyant 
qualities of water to improve muscular strength, core strength, 
balance, coordination, and posture. A variety of resistance 
equipment such as handheld weights, body bars, resistance 
tubing, bands, and flotation devices will be used. No prior 
swimming ability required. Fee: $10.
HPER 1431  Zumba® (0-2-1)
Zumba® is a Latin-inspired, dance-fitness class that 
incorporates Latin and international music and dance 
movements. This class format combines fast and slow 
rhythms that tone and sculpt the body in an aerobic-fitness 
fashion. This class integrates basic principles of aerobic, 
interval, and resistance training. Fee: $10.
HPER 1451  Yoga (0-2-1)
Yoga is a practice of physical postures, integrated with 
the breath, to release tensions and promote strength and 
flexibility of body, mind, and emotions. This simple practice is 
accessible to everyone, at any age, in any physical condition. 
Fee: $10.
HPER 1461  Cardio/Yoga/Strength (1-0-1)
Cardio/Yoga/Strength combines the best of yoga, strength 
training, and aerobics. Yoga is a practice of physical postures, 
integrated with breathing, to release tension and promote 
strength and flexibility of body, mind, and emotions. Strength 
training will include the use of hand-held weights, resistance 
tubing and/or stability ball. The aerobics portion of the class 
combines a variety of movements choreographed into a set of 
routines that improve cardiovascular endurance, coordination, 
and rhythm. Some class sets may include step benches and 
routines to improve muscular endurance. Fee: $10.
 
HPER 1471  Aerobic Kickboxing (0-2-1)
This course joins martial arts and group exercise in a union 
that provides an optimal workout for participants of all skill 
and fitness levels. Participants will learn the fundamental 
movements drawn from martial arts, and implement the 
techniques to improve overall fitness. Fee: $10.
HPER 1491  Tai Chi (1-0-1)
Tai Chi has been described as meditation in motion or a gentle 
martial art. In fact, it is both. Based on the circular, flowing 
movements of Yin and Yang, Tai Chi is an exercise system 
that can reduce stress and lower blood pressure, improve 
the cardiovascular system, increase balance, coordination, 
mobility and flexibility, boost one's immune system, and 
stimulate the flow of "Chi" (our body's life force). The practice 
of Tai Chi can be performed by people of ALL ages.
HPER 1501  Boot Camp (1-0-1)
All ability levels will benefit from this group exercise class 
that mixes traditional calisthenics and body weight exercises 
with interval training and strength training. Expect to burn 
fat, build muscle, reduce stress, increase energy, and boost 
confidence. Equipment such as BOSU balls, medicine balls, 
free weights, and resistance tubing may be used. An efficient 
and fun workout, boot camp fitness class challenges you to 
push outside your comfort zone by providing encouragement 
rather than intimidation. Fee: $10.
HPER 1531  Zumba®/Toning (1-0-1)
Zumba®/Toning is a dance-fitness class that incorporates 
Latin and international music and dance movements. This 
class format combines fast and slow rhythms that tone and 
sculpt the body in an aerobic/fitness fashion. This class 
integrates basic principles of aerobic, interval, and resistance 
training. Fee: $10.
HPER 1541  Hip Hop Fitness (1-0-1)
This class is an intense calorie-burning cardio class that will 
focus on Hip Hop, Latin, and many other international dance 
moves. No dance experience needed to participate.
HPER 1551  Barre Fitness (1-0-1)
This class is a fluid/flowing combination of pilates, yoga, and 
ballet movements that improve functional strength focusing 
on proper alignment and posture to improve balance, 
coordination, body awareness, and confidence. No dance 
experience is required and all fitness levels should see 
improvement. Resistive equipment (i.e. bands, tubing, hand 
weights, balls) may be added/used for extra challenges both 
in the standing and floor segments; foam rollers and/or body 
bars may be used to assist with balance or in place of the 
barre for standing movements.
HPER 1902  Recovery in Sports and Exercise (2-0-2) 
This course is designed to address recovery strategies 
in exercise and sports.  The focus of this course is on 
implementing appropriate recovery strategies to reduce 
injuries, and improve performance.  Course curriculum 
will explore physiological processes involved in training 
and recovery and theraputic exercises such as yoga, 
core training, rehabilitation exercises, and meditation. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
347

Health, Physical Education & Recreation (HPER), continued
HPER 2091-3  Special Topics in Health, Physical Education 
& Recreation (Variable) 
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in Health, 
Physical Education and Recreation. Topics to be determined 
by the program needs of students. May be repeated for a 
maximum of 3 credit hours. Permission of professor required. 
HPER 2333  Sport Nutrition (3-0-3)
This course examines the relationship between nutrition, 
physical performance, and overall wellness. Students will 
learn how to choose nutritious foods for healthy lifestyles 
and peak performance. Health and disease prevention 
through nutrition, physical activity, and wellness practices are 
essential components of the course. Prerequisite/corequisite: 
HPER 1213.
HPER 2612  Legal Aspects of Health & Sports Sciences 
(2-0-2)
The purpose of this course is to provide students with an 
understanding of the legal responsibilities pertaining to 
persons in the fields of HPER and personal training including 
application and interpretation of law. Prerequisite/corequisite: 
HPER 1213. This course is only offered in the spring semester.
HPER 2623  Physiology of Exercise (3-0-3)
This course will examine the physiological effects of exercise, 
the responses and adaptations of body systems to exercise, 
the essentials of an adequate diet, and the function of 
nutrients in exercise. Prerequisite/corequisite: HPER 1213. 
This course is only offered in the fall semester.
HPER 2633  Principles of Personal Training (3-0-3)
Prep course for National Strength and Conditioning 
Association (NSCA)-Certified Personal Trainer (CPT) exam. 
This course provides in-depth coverage of the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities required of personal trainers. Special 
coverage is given to exercise technique, including teaching 
approaches involving free-weight and machine exercises, 
cardiovascular activities, flexibility, and speed training. 
Prerequisite/corequisite: HPER 1213. This course is only 
offered in the spring semester.
HPER 2643  Applied Anatomy (3-0-3)
This course is a study of osteology, skeletal structure, 
neuromuscular system, and fundamentals of human 
anatomical structure with an emphasis on application to 
human movement. The ability of the musculoskeletal system 
to function simultaneously and systematically to produce 
human movement will be the primary objective of the course. 
Prerequisite/corequisite: HPER 1213. This course is only 
offered in the fall semester.
HPER 2701-3  Health & Sports Sciences Practicum (Var.) 
The practicum is offered in collaboration with selected 
agencies and programs throughout the State of Oklahoma. 
The student is placed in a program or agency under 
the approved supervision for the purpose of developing 
professional skills and values. Prerequisite/corequisite: HPER 
1213.
Health Sciences Allied Dental Courses (HSAD)
HSAD 1243  Advanced Clinical Procedures (2-4-3)
Theory and applied clinical experiences in the expanded 
duties of nitrous oxide, coronal polishing and pit and fissure 
sealant placement. Physiology of nitrous-oxide analgesia, its 
use, precautions, and administration procedures. Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of Program Director required.
Health Sciences Basic Courses (HSBC)
HSBC 1104  Anatomy & Physiology (4-0-4)
A study of functional anatomy with an emphasis on basic 
principles of physiological activities of the different systems 
of the body.
HSBC 1113  Medical Terminology (3-0-3) 
This course covers the Greek and Latin prefixes, suffixes, 
adjectives, verbs, and the anatomical roots, and includes the 
terms for major diseases, examination, and diagnosis.
HSBC 1121  Medical Ethics (1-0-1)
This survey course considers medical issues as they apply to 
the inter-relationships of health personnel, patients, physicians, 
and community. Various ethical issues are examined including 
confidentiality, informed consent, death and dying, euthanasia, 
abortion, and distribution of medical resources.
HSBC 1141  Basic Life Support Provider (1-0-1)
This course presents the American Heart Association (AHA) 
requirement for Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation (CPR). 
Participants will learn to recognize several life-threatening 
emergencies, provide CPR, use an Automated External 
Defibrillator (AED), and relieve choking in a safe, timely, and 
effective manner. The course includes adult, child, and infant 
rescue lessons for in-hospital/clinic settings. To obtain a Basic 
Life Support (BLS) course completion card, students must 
show competency on the skills test and the written exam. 
Lab fee: $10.
HSBC 1224  Introduction to Clinical Microbiology (3-2-4)
This course is designed for the health care professional. 
Basic introductory course in microbiology as related to the 
health care professional; consideration will be given primarily 
to the pathogenic microorganisms, including bacteria, virus, 
rickettsiae, fungus and protozoa. Emphasis will be placed on 
diseases caused by microorganisms, aseptic technique, and 
control of nosocomial infections. Lab fee: $15.
HSBC 2091-8  Special Topics in Health Sciences (Variable) 
Selected topics in specialized areas of Health Sciences. May 
be repeated with a change in subject matter for up to a total 
of 8 hours credit.
HSBC 2103  Human Pathology (3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to the study of the abnormalities 
of structure and function of the human body resulting in 
disease.  Knowledge of the normal structure and function 
of the body is required prior to enrolling in this course. 
Prerequisite: HSBC 1113 and one of the following HSBC 1104, 
HSBC 2114 or BIOL 2424
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
348

Health Sciences Dental Assisting (HSDA)
HSDA 1112  Dental Assisting (2-0-2)
Introduction to the career of dental assisting, with emphasis 
on its history, organization, and guidelines; basic dental 
terminology; introduction to the techniques of prevention, 
control, and patient motivation; basic procedures in first aid, 
emergencies, and the handling of special-needs patients. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSDA 1124  Clinical Procedures I (2-4-4)
Application of beginning principles and procedures of 
chairside assisting for various dental procedures; beginning 
clinical experience in general assisting techniques utilizing 
4-handed dentistry concepts with patient contact. Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDA 1134  Dental Sciences I (4-0-4)
Introductory principles of microbiology including study of oral 
microorganisms, sources and modes of transmission of oral 
infections; dental anatomy with emphasis on structures of the 
oral cavity, terminology, tooth morphology; embryology and 
histology of the head region and oral cavity. A basic survey 
of head and neck anatomy principles is included. Permission 
of Program Director required.
HSDA 1143  Dental Materials (2-2-3)
Composition, properties, and classification of materials 
commonly used in dentistry with concentrated lab practice in 
their preparation and manipulation. Lab fee: $10. Permission 
of Program Director required.
HSDA 1153  Dental Radiography (2-2-3) 
Principles of dental radiography including radiation, 
physics, biology, and procedures for radiation protection; 
techniques 
for 
exposing, 
scanning, 
and 
orienting 
dental 
radiographic 
images; 
patient 
management; 
special 
and 
accessory 
radiographic 
techniques. 
Lab fee $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
 
HSDA 1215  Clinical Procedures II (3-4-5) 
A continuation of HSDA 1124 with introduction to chairside 
dental assisting for the various recognized dental specialties; 
experience in basic expanded functions including actual 
patient contact. Radiographic experience in order to ensure 
quality assurance in exposing and processing dental 
radiographs. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director 
required.
HSDA 1225  Dental Sciences II (5-0-5)
A continuation of HSDA 1134. Introduction to fundamentals 
of anatomy and physiology, pharmacology and pathology 
as they relate to the oral cavity, basic diet and nutrition 
principles, including diet counseling in cavities prevention 
and control. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDA 1232  Practice Management (2-0-2) 
Survey of dental practice management, including business 
and office procedures, public relations, and skills for seeking 
employment. Ethical and legal aspects of dentistry including 
legal functions for Oklahoma dental assistants. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSDA 1241  Correlation Seminar (1-0-1)
Orientation to HSDA 1252 and HSDA 1353 which includes 
familiarization with extramural settings, operations, and 
evaluation procedures.   Review of chairside procedures, student 
experiences, and discussions relating to national credentials. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
HSDA 1252  Dental Assisting Practicum I (0-16-2)
Applied clinical experience in chairside assisting in various 
clinics. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDA 1353  Dental Assisting Practicum II (1-38-3) 
Field experience and dental assisting techniques including 
4-handed dentistry concepts, radiographic techniques, and 
assisting in operative and specialty procedures. Permission 
of Program Director required.
Health Sciences Dental Hygiene (HSDH)
HSDH  1105 Dental Hygiene I (3-6-5) 
Introduction to personal oral hygiene care and patient 
instruction; initiation of clinical procedures including 
instrumentation used in oral prophylaxis; introduction to oral 
inspection procedures including procedures for obtaining 
pertinent patient medical/dental information. Lab fee: $10. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 1113  Dental Embryology, Histology & Anatomy (3-0-3)
The course provides a study of embryonic development 
of the face and oral cavity, the basic tissues composing 
human organs, histology of dental tissues, normal tooth 
development, and dental anomalies. Dental anatomy focuses 
on form and function of permanent and deciduous human 
teeth. Emphasis is placed on identification of teeth and 
on knowledge of tooth form and contour for instrument 
adaptation. Permission of Program Director required.
 
HSDH 1205  Dental Hygiene II (3-8-5) 
Clinical practice in oral prophylaxis, application and 
reinforcement of topics introduced in HSDH 1105 with 
introduction of auxiliary clinical procedures; anatomy of the 
head and neck with emphasis on structures related to oral 
cavity. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required.
Health Sciences Basic Courses (HSBC), continued
HSBC 2114  Human Anatomy (3-2-4)
This course is an introductory study of human anatomy 
using models and mammalian dissection. Lab and lecture 
are integrated with 3 hours lecture and 2 hours of lab each 
week. Prerequisite: HSBC 1113, equivalent, or permission of 
professor. Lab fee: $15. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
349

HSDH 1213  Dental Materials (2-2-3) 
Composition and properties of materials commonly used 
in dentistry with lab practice in their preparation and 
manipulation. Lab emphasis on legalized functions for the 
dental hygienist relating to dental materials. Lab fee: $10. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 1222  Dental Radiography (1-2-2) 
Principles of dental radiography including radiation, physics, 
biology, and procedures for radiation protection; techniques 
for exposing, scanning, and orienting dental radiographic 
images; patient management; special and accessory 
radiographic techniques. Lab fee $10. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSDH 1241 Periodontics I (1-0-1) 
Study of the supporting structures of the teeth in health 
and disease states with emphasis on clinical appearances, 
cause of periodontal disease, types of periodontal diseases, 
histopathogenesis, and microorganisms in gingivitis and 
periodontitis, correlation between systemic health and 
periodontal health and recognition and treatment of 
periodontal emergencies. Also includes instruction in the 
use of Gracey curets and their sharpening. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSDH 2305  Dental Hygiene III (1-20-5) 
A continuation of HSDH 1205. Introduction of additional patient 
treatment procedures; adaptation of clinical procedures in 
special patient care; clinical application of radiography and 
periodontics; lab experience in administration of nitrous 
oxide analgesia and local anesthesia. Seminars on additional 
subjects related to dental hygiene practice. Assignments at 
affiliated clinics will be arranged. Lab fee: $10. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSDH 2312 Community Dental Health I (2-0-2) 
Introduction to the scientific research process through the 
scientific method, manipulation of variables, research designs, 
data collection, interpretation of data, and presentation of 
findings. Role of fluoride in public health and the prevalence 
and incidence of dental diseases. Introduction to the 
learning process in relation to public health education. Active 
participation in community projects is also required. Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 2323  Pathology for the Dental Hygienist (3-0-3) 
Introduction to general pathology; clinical application 
to disease of the oral cavity including manifestations of 
inflammation, degenerative changes, neoplastic disease and 
developmental anomalies; visual differentiation between 
normal and abnormal oral tissues and conditions. Permission 
of Program Director required.
HSDH 2331  Periodontics II (1-0-1) 
A continuation of HSDH 1241 including the use of various 
periodontal assessment tools in addition to different types of 
Gracey curets and application of advanced instrumentation 
techniques, powered instrumentation, phases of periodontal 
therapy including treatment planning and principles of 
scaling and root planning, principles of periodontal surgery, 
the use of chemotherapeutics, and the role of occlusion. Also 
includes the immunologic aspects of periodontal disease. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 2343  Pharmacology/Anxiety & Pain Control (3-0-3) 
General principles of pharmacology; modes of administration 
and effects on organs and systems of the body; special 
emphasis on drugs used in dentistry, their sources, preparation 
and therapeutic uses. Principles of general anesthesia and 
agents used. Physiology of dental local anesthesia, its 
use, precautions, and administration procedures. Clinical 
experiences in administration of nitrous-oxide analgesia and 
local anesthesia are received in HSDH 2305 and HSDH 2405 
clinic. Lab fee $10. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 2405  Dental Hygiene IV (1-20-5) 
A continuation of HSDH 2305. Refinement of clinical skills 
and introduction of additional patient treatment procedures; 
clinical experience in administration of nitrous oxide analgesia 
and local anesthesia. Seminar on additional subjects related 
to dental hygiene practice. Assignments at affiliated clinics 
will be arranged. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSDH 2413  Community Dental Health II (3-0-3) 
A continuation of HSDH 2312. Introduction to public health 
education and opportunities for dental hygienists in the 
field of public health dentistry. Instruction includes the role 
of dental auxiliaries, career perspectives, history of dental 
public health, principles of learning and motivation, methods 
of planning, instructional methods and materials, resources 
and quality control techniques. Dental health needs, 
resources and objectives are presented concurrently with 
the delivery of dental care and financing. Active participation 
in community projects is required. Lab fee: $10. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSDH 2423  Practice Administration (3-0-3) 
Survey of dental practice management; business and 
office procedures including recall systems; professional 
responsibilities of the dental hygienist with emphasis on 
ethical and legal aspects of dental and dental hygiene practice; 
psychology and philosophies of patient management. 
Practicum may be arranged. Permission of Program Director 
required.
HSDH 2431  Periodontics III (1-0-1) 
A continuation of HSDH 2331 with emphasis on a self-
directed approach to research on literature topics relevant 
to dental hygiene in the field of periodontics, as well 
as evidence-based decision making. Additional didactic 
emphasis is placed on power scalers, implant maintenance, 
subgingival chemotherapeutic device placement, and phase 
I re-evaluation. Permission of Program Director required.
HSDH 2502  Dental Hygiene Licensure Preparation 
(2-0-2) 
Preparation and orientation for clinical dental hygiene 
licensing examination including regional examination format; 
examination logistics and materials; and patient selection by 
candidate. Course includes availability of clinical facility for 
patient screening; equipment, supplies and liability insurance 
for regional clinical examination. This course is available to 
students who are in the second eight weeks of their fourth 
semester of the Dental Hygiene Program. Lab fee $10. 
Permission of Program Director required. 
Health Sciences Dental Hygiene (HSDH), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
350

Health Sciences Health Information Management (HSHI)
HSHI 1104  Introduction to Health Information (3-2-4) 
This course covers the history and development of the 
health information management profession and professional 
ethics.  Emphasis is placed on basic functions of a health 
information department, paper and electronic record 
format, content including documentation standards, and 
guidelines specific to acute care hospital accreditation 
standards, state licensing, and Medicare certification 
requirements.  Introductions to other settings including 
ambulatory, rehabilitation, long-term care, home health, and 
mental health will also be addressed.  Health care delivery 
systems and current health care professions are discussed. 
Laboratory Fee: $10.  Prerequisites: HSBC 1113 or concurrent 
enrollment.  Permission of Program Director required. 
HSHI 1113  Healthcare Law and Compliance (3-0-3) 
This course examines the ethical and regulatory 
requirements necessary to manage and protect health 
information.  It is a study of laws that pertain to health 
information, 
specifically 
those 
relating 
to 
privacy, 
confidentiality, and patient autonomy.  It introduces the 
American legal system and legal terminology, reviews current 
health care legislation, and the essentials of a health care 
compliance program.  Commonly used legal terminology 
is emphasized.  Permission of Program Director required. 
HSHI 1213  Health Information Statistics & Data Display 
(3-0-3) 
This course emphasizes commonly computed health care 
statistics and basic statistics, related terminology, vital 
records, analysis and presentation of data, introduction to 
basic research principles, and institutional review board 
functions. Software applications are utilized. Permission of 
Program Director required. Prerequisite: HSHI 1104. 
HSHI 1222  Professional Practice Experience I (0-4-2) 
This course offers the coordination and supervision of clinical 
learning experiences in affiliating health care facilities and/or 
program laboratory. Permission of Program Director required. 
Prerequisite: HSHI 1104. 
HSHI 1233  Ambulatory Coding (3-0-3)
This course is an in-depth presentation of principles and 
guidelines to accurately code and sequence ambulatory 
procedures using various classification and clinical terminology 
systems with a special emphasis on Current Procedural 
Terminology and the Outpatient Prospective Payment System. 
Coding exercises and specialized software are utilized to 
demonstrate understanding.  Prerequisites:  HSBC 1113, HSBC 
1104, HSHI 1104.  Permission of Program Director required. 
 
HSHI 1243 Health Data Management (2-2-3)
This course will focus on data creation, storage, integrity and 
exchange as it is utilized in the health information profession. 
Specific focus will be placed on the development and 
maintenance of healthcare-related databases, creation and 
evaluation of data dictionaries and data sets, managing data, 
data security, as well as the standards for health information 
exchange.  Prerequisite:  HSHI 1104. Permission of Program 
Director required.
 
 
HSHI 2091-3  Directed Studies in Health Information 
(Variable)
Selected topics in specialized areas of health information. 
May be repeated with a change in subject matter for up to a 
total of 3 credit hours. Will not satisfy any of the credit hour 
requirements for an associate degree program. Permission of 
Program Director required. 
HSHI  2203 ICD Coding I (2-2-3)
This course provides an in-depth presentation of principles 
and guidelines to accurately code and sequence diagnoses 
and procedures using various classification systems and 
nomenclatures with a special emphasis on ICD. Coding 
exercises are utilized to demonstrate understanding. Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of Program Director required. Prerequisites: 
HSBC 1113 and HSBC 1104. Co-requisites: HSBC 2103 and 
HSHI 1104.
HSHI 2213  Health Information Management (2-2-3) 
This course is a study of management with application to 
health information management functions. Management 
functions of planning, decision making, organizing, staffing, 
directing, and controlling, as well as revenue cycle and 
financial management are emphasized. An overview of 
legal and regulatory requirements affecting human resource 
management is included. Laboratory Fee: $10. Permission 
of Program Director required. Prerequisites: HSHI 1104 and 
HSHI 1213.
HSHI 2222  Professional Practice Experience II (0-4-2)
This course is a continuation of HSHI 1222. Practical 
experience is broadened in affiliating health care facilities 
and/or program laboratory. Permission of Program Director 
required. Prerequisite: HSHI 1222.
HSHI 2223 Healthcare Reimbursement & Revenue Cycle 
Management (3-0-3)
This course is a study of US healthcare reimbursement 
methodologies and payment systems with emphasis on 
management of revenue cycle processes.  Compliance with 
coding and billing regulatory requirements is evaluated.  
Permission of Program Director required.
 
HSHI 2232  Quality Improvement (2-0-2)
This course covers the practical application of quality, 
utilization, risk management, case management, critical 
pathways, and medical staff services including credentialing. 
Current national initiatives designed to manage and improve 
the quality and safety of patient care are introduced. 
Permission of Program Director required. Prerequisites: HSHI 
1104, HSHI 1213, and HSHI 1113, or concurrent enrollment.
HSHI 2332  Health Information Seminar (2-0-2) 
This course includes a survey of current practices and trends 
in health information management with emphasis on the 
electronic health record (EHR) and health information systems. 
Resume writing, interviewing and preparing for the RHIT 
(Registered Health Information Technologist) examination are 
included in the course. This capstone course should be taken 
in the student’s last semester of study. Permission of Program 
Director required. Prerequisites: HSHI 1113, HSHI 2203, HSHI 
2213, and HSHI 2222. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
351

Health Sciences Health Information Management (HSHI), continued
HSHI 2423  ICD Coding II (3-0-3) 
This course is a continuation of HSHI 2203 with emphasis 
on utilizing specialized software for more complex ICD code 
assignments and groupings to demonstrate understanding. 
Validation of coding and grouping accuracy, compliance with 
regulatory requirements and reimbursement methodologies, 
creation of compliant physician queries and adherence to 
ethical standards of practice will be emphasized.  Lab Fee 
$10.  Prerequisites: HSHI 2203, HSBC 2103.  Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSHI 2572 Coding Practicum (2-0-2)
In this course students use inpatient and outpatient (e.g., 
ambulatory surgery, emergency department, physician 
office, case studies and patient records) to assign codes 
to diagnosis/procedure statements.  Coding and grouping 
software is utilized with emphasis on ICD-10-CM and ICD-
10-PCS coding and DRG assignment, CPT coding and APC 
assignment.  Coding audits and management of coding 
services are covered.  Permission of Program Director 
Required.  Prerequisite:  HSHI 2203.  Co-requisites:  HSHI 
2423, HSHI 1233.
 
HSHI 2631  Pharmacology for Health Information (1-0-1) 
This course presents basic pharmacology concepts used to 
ensure accurate and complete identification of diagnosis and 
procedures when coding medical records/health information. 
Permission of Program Director required.
Health Sciences Medical Laboratory Technology (HSML)
HSML 1103  Introduction to the Medical Laboratory (3-2-3) 
A study of the lab environment including lab safety, 
equipment, instrumentation, vocabulary, and quality control/
quality assurance. Includes the principles and techniques 
used in urinalysis. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSML 1113  Hematology I (2-2-3)
A study of the normal process of blood cell production and 
hemostasis, including common lab testing methods. This 
course is held the first 8 weeks of the Fall semester. Lab fee: 
$10. Permission of Program Director required.
HSML 1123  Immunology (2-2-3)
Fundamental principles of immunology are presented and 
applied to testing methods used in the medical laboratory. 
This course is held the second 8 weeks of the Fall semester. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required.
HSML 1213  Hematology II (2-2-3) 
The second portion of the study of hematology focuses 
on disease processes commonly seen in the medical 
laboratory. These include anemias and leukemias. Emphasis 
is placed on the microscopic analysis of blood cells and their 
abnormalities. This course is held the second 8 weeks of 
the Spring semester. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program 
Director required. Prerequisite: HSML 1113. 
 
HSML 1221  Phlebotomy (1-0-1) 
Theory and technique of proper collection of blood samples 
for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic purposes. Includes 
arterial, capillary, and venous collection in adults and children. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
HSML 1223  Immunohematology (2-2-3)
A study of the antigens present on red blood cells, their 
associated antibodies, and the blood banking techniques 
used to identify suitable donor blood for transfusion. This 
course is held the first 8 weeks of the Spring semester. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
Prerequisite: HSML 1123.
HSML 2405  Clinical Laboratory Science I (0-16-5)
Experience and training in local hospital lab under supervision 
of pathologists, staff technologists, and MLT education 
coordinator. This is the first clinical course for the 2-year 
option. Permission of Program Director is required.
 
HSML 2412  Clinical Laboratory Science A (0-8-2)
Experience and training in local hospital lab under supervision 
of pathologists, staff technologists, and MLT education 
coordinator. This is the first clinical course for the 1-year 
option. Permission of Program Director required.
HSML 2415  Clinical Analytical Chemistry (4-3-5) 
Application 
of 
instrumentation 
and 
manual 
techniques for quantitative analysis of body fluids. 
Lab 
fee: 
$10. 
Permission 
of 
Program 
Director 
required. Prerequisites: CHEM 1114 and CHEM 1124. 
 
HSML 2505  Clinical Laboratory Science II (0-16-5) 
Experience and training in local hospital laboratories under 
supervision of pathologists, staff technologists, and MLT 
education coordinator. This is the second clinical course for 
the 2-year option. Permission of Program Director required. 
Prerequisite: HSML 2405. 
 
HSML 2515  Pathogenic Microbiology (4-3-5) 
A study of the pathogenic microorganisms of man. Includes 
pathogenic bacteria, fungi, and parasites. Emphasis 
placed upon identification of the microorganisms. Includes 
morphology, physiology, etiology, and growth characteristics 
of the organisms. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program 
Director required. Prerequisite: HSBC 1224 or BIOL 2035. 
HSML 2518  Clinical Laboratory Science B (0-24-8)
Experience and training in local hospital lab under supervision 
of pathologists, staff technologists, and MLT education 
coordinator. This is the second clinical course for the 
one-year option. Permission of Program Director required. 
Prerequisite: HSML 2412.
HSML 2606  Clinical Laboratory Science III (0-40-6) 
Experience and training in local hospitals under supervision 
of pathologists, staff technologists, and MLT educational 
coordinator. This is an 8-week course completing both the 1- 
and 2-year options. Permission of Program Director required. 
Prerequisite: HSML 2505 or HSML 2518.  
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
352

Health Sciences Nursing Science (HSNS)
HSNS 1011  Introduction to Professional Nursing Practice 
Concepts (1-0-1)
This course is for students applying for admission to the 
Nursing Science Program and is intended to help students 
prepare for successful achievement of the academic 
requirements of the program. Students are introduced to the 
role of the nurse and the historical transformation of nursing 
practice over time. The nursing process is introduced. 
Activities are designed to expand academic skills and 
prepare students for higher-level thinking through use of 
enhanced study skills and clinical reasoning strategies. 
Emphasis is placed on self-reflection to enhance the learning 
process. Permission of Program Director required.
HSNS 1118  Professional Nursing Concepts I (4-10-8)
This course for the beginning professional nursing student 
provides the foundation upon which subsequent nursing 
courses are built. The student is introduced to beginning-level 
concepts and skills. The nursing process and professional 
practice roles are expanded upon. Campus lab and clinical 
experiences facilitate psychomotor application of concepts, 
principles and skills in the provision of nursing care for 
persons across the lifespan who are well or experiencing 
common acute and chronic alterations in health. Acceptance 
into the Nursing Science Program and permission of the 
Program Director required. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: HSNS 
1011. 
HSNS 1214  Concepts for Transition to Professional 
Nursing Practice (3-2-4)
This course is for students applying for admission to the Career 
Ladder Track. Concepts for transition into professional nursing 
practice are presented. Activities are designed to expand 
academic skills and prepare students for higher-level thinking 
through use of enhanced study skills and clinical reasoning 
strategies. Psychomotor skills and competencies are evaluated 
and enhanced through directed activities. Permission of the 
Program Director is required.  Successful completion of the 
LPN Challenge Exam may also be required.  Lab fee $10. 
HSNS 1218  Professional Nursing Concepts II (5-8-8)
Building on HSNS 1118, concepts and skills necessary to 
the provision of professional nursing care for persons 
across the lifespan experiencing common acute chronic 
health alterations are expanded. Concepts related to the 
provision of nursing care for persons with mental health and 
behavioral challenges and for specialized care of the aging 
population are also emphasized. Skills necessary to build 
relationships and confidence in the practice of professional 
nursing are enhanced. Includes a campus lab period in which 
psychomotor applications of concepts, principles, and skills 
are expanded. Permission of Program Director required. Lab 
fee: $10. Prerequisites: HSNS 1011 and HSNS 1118. 
 
HSNS 2091-6  Directed Studies in Nursing (Variable) 
Selected topics in specialized areas of nursing and health 
care. May be repeated with a change in subject matter for up 
to a total of 8 hours credit. Will not satisfy any of the credit 
hour requirements for an associate degree program.
HSNS 2118  Professional Nursing Concepts III (5-8-8)
This course builds on the concepts introduced in the first 
year of the nursing program and is the entry point for 
Career Ladder Track. Concepts affecting the provision of 
professional nursing care for persons across the lifespan 
experiencing more complicated acute and chronic illnesses 
are developed. Reproductive health and pediatric issues are 
emphasized. Includes campus lab and clinical experiences in 
which psychomotor applications of concepts, principles, and 
skills are expanded. Management and leadership skills are 
strengthened. Acceptance in the Nursing Science Program 
and permission of the Program Director required. Lab fee: 
$10. Prerequisites: HSNS 1011 or 1214, HSNS 1118, and HSNS 
1218. 
HSNS 2121  Basic Dysrhythmias (1-0-1)
An overview of the anatomy and electrophysiology of 
the heart, with instruction, discussion and practice using 
basic skills necessary to analyze and identify common 
dysrhythmias.
HSNS 2212  Advanced Professional Nursing Practice 
Concepts (2-0-2)
This course explores topics relevant to beginning a career 
as a professional registered nurse including health care 
trends, organizational politics, political activities on the state 
and national level, NCLEX-RN preparation, attaining the first 
job, integration into local and professional communities, 
continuing competence, professional growth, etc. Activities 
are designed to prepare the student for assumption of 
a beginning position as a professional registered nurse 
including service to the community. Permission of the 
Program Director required. Prerequisites: HSNS 1011 or HSNS 
1214, HSNS 1118, HSNS 1218, HSNS 2118, and concurrent 
enrollment with HSNS 2218. 
HSNS 2218  Professional Nursing Concepts IV (4-11-8)
This course focuses on the integration of previously learned 
concepts and skills into the provision of nursing care 
for person(s) experiencing complex acute and chronic 
illnesses. Includes campus lab and clinical experiences in 
which psychomotor applications of concepts, principles, 
and skills are expanded. Management and leadership skills 
are further strengthened through application of concepts 
during precepted clinical experiences. Activities are aimed 
at preparing the student for assumption of the first position 
as a registered nurse. Permission of the Program Director 
required. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisites: HSNS 1011 or 1214, 
HSNS 1118, HSNS 1218, and HSNS 2118.
HSPC 1234  Comprehensive Phlebotomy (3-2-4)
Basic procedures in phlebotomy plus special procedures. 
Overview of anatomy and physiology, vital signs, techniques, 
lab organization, infection control, quality control procedures, 
and lab safety. Lab fee: $10. Admission into the program is 
required.
HSPC 1344  Phlebotomy Practicum (0-25-4)
Practical knowledge gained through experience in an area 
hospital. Includes venous and capillary blood collection. 
Pediatric and arterial blood collections are observed. 
Prerequisite: HSPC 1234.
Health Sciences Phlebotomy (HSPC)
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
353

Health Sciences Respiratory Therapist (HSRT)
HSRT 2091-3  Directed Studies in Respiratory Care (Var.) 
Selected topics in specialized areas of respiratory care. May 
be repeated with a change in subject matter for up to a 
total of 3 credit hours. Will not satisfy any of the credit hour 
requirements for an associate degree program. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSRT 2103  Pulmonary Diagnostics (2-2-3) 
An introduction to diagnostic procedures. Special emphasis 
is placed on pulmonary function testing and interpreting test 
results. Also included are bronchoscopy assisting, sleep 
studies, cardiopulmonary exercise testing, cardiopulmonary 
rehab, and home care. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSRT 2114  Respiratory Therapy Procedures I (3-4-4)
An introduction to respiratory therapy, this course includes 
infection control and sterilization, physical assessment and 
chart review, radiologic assessment of the chest, gas physics, 
medical gas therapy and delivery systems, humidity and 
aerosol therapy, lung expansion therapy and coughing 
techniques, secretion clearance techniques, and manual 
resuscitators. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director 
required.
 
HSRT 2202  Respiratory Therapy Procedures II (1-2-2) 
This course is a continuation of HSRT 2114 and focuses on the 
theory, skill performance, troubleshooting, and modification 
of advanced level cardiopulmonary therapeutics. This 
includes arterial blood gas sampling and analysis, basic and 
emergency airway management, endotracheal intubation 
and extubation, tracheostomy tube management, specialty 
airway placement, electrocardiography, and waveform 
capnography. Lab fee $10. Permission of Program Director 
required.
HSRT 2211  Ethics & Health Care Systems for Respiratory 
Care Practitioners (1-0-1) 
Includes key organizational and operational elements of 
health care delivery organization and delivery of respiratory 
care services in the acute care setting, as well as ethics and 
legal standards applied to the practice of respiratory care.
HSRT 2213  Mechanical Ventilation (2-3-3) 
A continuation of HSRT 2114, this course offers information 
on the principle of mechanical ventilation and the effects of 
positive pressure ventilation. The operating modes, initiation 
of and monitoring of mechanical ventilation is also covered. 
The student will become proficient in interpreting waveforms 
in mechanical ventilation, management of mechanical 
ventilation, and weaning techniques, as well as representation 
on various mechanical ventilators. Lab fee: $10. Permission of 
Program Director required. 
HSRT 2221  Introduction to Clinic (1-0-1) 
This course is designed as an introductory clinical course for 
the beginning Respiratory Therapy Program student.  The 
course will prepare students with the proper orientation and 
training that is required by clinical sites and will focus on 
clinical observation, assistance, and performance of basic 
respiratory therapy modalities.  The course will introduce the 
student to basic assessment and treatment modalities taught 
in the Procedures I course.  Clinical practice is coordinated to 
cover infection control, physical assessment, oxygen therapy, 
aerosol medication delivery, chest physiotherapy techniques 
and basic life support skills. Permission of Program Director 
required.
 
HSRT 2224  Respiratory Therapy Clinic Practice I (0-24-4) 
Respiratory Therapy procedures are practiced in specialty 
areas of the hospital with supplemental information received 
through physician lectures. The clinical experience is 
coordinated to cover the areas of infection control and 
sterilization, physical assessment and chart review, radiologic 
assessment of the chest, medical gas therapy and delivery 
systems, humidity and aerosol therapy, pulmonary function 
testing, lung expansion therapy, secretion clearance 
techniques, manual resuscitators, BLS, NRP and ACLS. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSRT 2233  Respiratory Physiology (3-0-3) 
This course is designed as an in-depth study of the 
anatomy and physiology of the respiratory system. The 
respiratory functions include a review of the anatomy and 
the physiology of ventilation, diffusion of pulmonary gases, 
the circulatory system, oxygen and carbon dioxide transport, 
acid-base balance and regulation, and ventilation perfusion 
relationships. Permission of Program Director required.
HSRT 2242  Respiratory Pharmacology (2-0-2) 
This course is a comprehensive yet practical understanding 
of current information in respiratory pharmacology. This 
course provides a sound basis of theoretic concepts of 
the physiopharmacologic functions of the lungs, heart, and 
kidneys applicable to both the chronic pulmonary disease 
ambulatory patient and the intensive care unit respiratory 
failure victim. A wide range of classes of drugs is given 
full consideration with emphasis on practical choices of 
individual agents for individual situations. Also discussed 
are new drugs likely to become available in the near future. 
Permission of Program Director required. 
HSRT 2324  Respiratory Therapy Clinic Practice II (0-40-4) 
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSRT 2224 with 
intensive care involvement. Physician and faculty lectures 
and clinical practice are coordinated to cover adult, pediatric, 
and neonatal critical care, advanced airway care, mechanical 
ventilation, blood gas sampling techniques and analysis, and 
critical care monitoring. Alternate site clinical experiences 
will be offered as available. Permission of Program Director 
required. 
HSRT 2333  Respiratory Pathology (3-0-3) 
An in-depth study of specific respiratory diseases covering 
the method of diagnosis, treatment, clinical manifestation, 
prognosis, pathology, and incidence of occurrence in the 
general population. Permission of Program Director required.
HSRT 2334  Respiratory Therapy Clinic Practice III (0-40-4) 
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSRT 2324 with 
intensive care involvement. Physician and faculty lectures 
and clinical practice are coordinated to cover adult, pediatric, 
and neonatal critical care, advanced airway care, mechanical 
ventilation, blood gas sampling techniques and analysis and 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
354

Health Sciences Respiratory Therapist (HSRT), continued
critical care monitoring. Alternate site clinical experiences 
will be offered as available. Permission of Program Director 
required. 
HSRT 2342  Respiratory Therapy Critical Care (2-0-2)
A survey of procedures and principles utilized in the 
diagnosis and management of the critically ill patient: clinical 
laboratory studies, fluid and electrolyte balance, critical care 
assessment and treatment, hemodynamic monitoring, and 
ECG interpretation. Permission of Program Director required.
HSRT 2353  Pediatric Respiratory Care (3-0-3)
This course emphasizes comprehensive assessment 
techniques, respiratory therapeutics, and critical care 
management specific to neonatal and pediatric patients 
diagnosed with cardiopulmonary diseases and congenital 
defects. Critical care therapeutics presented include 
noninvasive/invasive mechanical ventilation, specialty gas 
administration, high-frequency ventilation, and extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Fetal development, newborn 
stabilization, and introductory resuscitation concepts are also 
covered. Permission of Program Director.
Health Sciences Radiologic Technology (HSXT)
HSXT 1015  Basic Radiographic Anatomy & Positioning 
(2-6-5) 
The principles of radiographic anatomy and positioning for 
the hand, wrist, chest, abdomen, to include upper and lower 
extremities, digestive and urinary systems, with emphasis on 
equipment operation and safety. Lab fee: $10. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSXT 1105  Radiologic Technology I (4-2-5) 
Introduction 
to 
Radiologic 
Technology 
including 
terminology, patient care, body mechanics, medical law, 
medical ethics, fundamentals of radiographic exposure, 
and radiation protection will be covered. A continuation 
of basic radiographic positioning from HSXT 1015 will 
include upper limbs, lower limbs, and pelvic structures. 
Critical analysis activities will be utilized during lab and 
classroom time to ensure integration of program curriculum. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
HSXT 1112  Diagnostic Imaging Practicum I (0-8-2) 
Coordination and supervision of learning experience in an 
approved, affiliated hospital clinical setting. Student will be 
rotated through various clinics by arrangement. The number 
of hours in clinical rotation varies. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSXT 1205  Radiologic Technology II (4-2-5) 
A study of the various radiographic procedures along with 
radiographic film processing and quality assurance for 
the radiology department. A continuation of radiographic 
positioning to include the shoulder girdle, bony thorax, 
the total spine and skull with film critique and radiographic 
exposure. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director 
required.
HSXT 1215  Diagnostic Imaging Practicum II (0-20-5) 
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSXT 1112. The 
number of hours in clinical rotation varies. Permission of 
Program Director required. 
HSXT 1223  Radiologic Physics (3-0-3) 
The concepts of general physics as they pertain to radiologic 
technology. Demonstrations will include the circuitry of the 
radiographic equipment. Permission of Program Director 
required.
HSXT 2091-6  Special Topics in Radiologic Technology 
(Variable) 
This elective course will explore in depth the medical imaging 
modalities (but not limited to) of Computed Tomography, 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Nuclear Medicine, Sonography, 
Radiation Therapy, Interventional Vascular procedures and 
Mammography. Knowledge of these specialties affords the 
student professional development prior to graduation from 
the program.
HSXT 2302  Special Radiographic Procedures & 
Radiobiology (2-0-2) 
Specialized and highly technical procedures that are 
performed in the Radiology Department will be presented, 
along with a discussion of the equipment and opaque 
media used for these procedures. Radiographic anatomy 
involved in these procedures will be demonstrated and 
correlated with the student's general knowledge of anatomy 
and physiology. Radiobiology discusses effects of ionizing 
radiation on biological systems. Includes interactions with 
water and macromolecules, early and late effects on germ 
cells, embryo, and adult tissues. Permission of Program 
Director required.
HSXT 2313  Summer Imaging Practicum I (0-12-3)
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSXT 1215. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSXT 2405  Radiologic Technology III (4-2-5) 
Radiographic exposure techniques is a major component of 
this course. Critical analysis activities will ensure integration 
of program curriculum. Advanced radiographic positioning 
includes facial bones, sinuses, temporal mandibular joints, 
optic foramina, mastoids. Critical analysis of these images in 
the lab and classroom will be a course component. Pediatric 
radiographic procedures is a component of this course. 
Lab fee: $10. Permission of Program Director required. 
HSXT 2415  Medical Imaging Practicum I (0-20-5) 
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSXT 2313. The 
number of hours in clinic rotation varies. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSXT 2423  Department Administration & Records/
Pharmacology (3-0-3)
Various phases of management and operation of a department 
of radiology including planning and personnel relationships. 
Costs, legal considerations, department records, archiving 
systems, and schedule preparation will be presented. This 
unit will provide the student with the basic concepts of 
pharmacology. The theory and practice of basic techniques 
of venipuncture and the administration of diagnostic 
contrasts and/or intravenous medications are included. The  
 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
355

Health Sciences Radiologic Technology (HSXT), continued
appropriate delivery of patient care during these procedures 
is emphasized. Permission of the Program Director required.
HSXT 2505  Radiologic Technology IV (4-2-5) 
This course includes an analytical approach to scientific 
research as it relates to radiologic technology.  Trauma 
radiography, and radiographic pathology will be covered.  
Quality 
control/quality 
assurance 
problem-solving 
methodologies will be explored.  Critical thinking skills 
specific to radiographic imaging will be utilized in the lab 
and classroom to assess integration of program curriculum. 
Permission of Program Director required. Lab fee $10. 
HSXT 2515  Medical Imaging Practicum II (0-20-5) 
Continuation of clinical experiences as in HSXT 2415. The 
number of hours in clinical rotation varies. Permission of 
Program Director required.
HSXT 2522  Radiologic Technology Seminar (2-0-2) 
Introduction to career related, advanced imaging modalities; 
nuclear medicine, sonography, computed tomography, 
radiation therapy, and magnetic resonance imaging.  Lab fee 
$10.  Permission of the Program Director required.
 
HSXT 2602  Summer Imaging Practicum II (0-8-2)
Continuation of clinical experience as in HSXT 2515. 
Permission of Program Director required.
HSXT 2614  Analytic Radiologic Technology (4-0-4)
A situational approach to the synthesis of diagnostic and 
specialized radiologic procedures including critical analysis 
and evaluation of product and equipment. Permission of 
Program Director required.
Humanities (HUM)
HUM 2091-4  Special Topics in Humanities (Variable) 
Directed individual or class study of special topics in 
Humanities. May be repeated with different topics. Permission 
of professor required.
HUM 2113  Humanities through the Middle Ages (3-0-3) 
Designed to acquaint the students with the evolution of 
Western Culture through a survey of the major creative, 
philosophical/religious, and socio-political developments 
of ancient Middle Eastern cultures through Medieval 
European culture. May be taken as credit for Humanities 
General Education Requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or 
concurrent enrollment.
HUM 2191-4  Humanities Internship (Variable) 
Student or professor-arranged internship or individual 
projects regarding issues in the Humanities. Permission of 
professor required.
HUM 2223  Humanities from the Renaissance (3-0-3) 
Designed to acquaint the student with the evolution of 
Western Culture through a survey of the major creative, 
philosophical/religious, and socio-political developments of 
the Renaissance to the present. May be taken as credit for 
Humanities General Education Requirements. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1113 or concurrent enrollment.
HUM 2313  American Humanities (3-0-3) 
The goal of this course is to give the student an appreciation of 
our civilization as a vital culture with its own traditions, customs, 
values, ideals, ethics, and myths, and an understanding 
of its relationship to other civilizations. This course is an 
interdisciplinary study of the cultural accomplishments of 
America from its colonial beginnings to the present. The 
artistic, literary, musical, and philosophical movements and 
creators will be emphasized to provide a comprehensive 
understanding of the development and influence of American 
culture. May be taken as credit for Humanities General 
Education Requirements.   Special Note:  This American 
Humanities class will transfer to most universities as general 
humanities elective credit, but may not transfer for credit as 
American Humanities when that specific course is required 
for one of their degrees since American Humanities is a 
3000-level course at most universities.  Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113 or concurrent enrollment.
HUM 2323  Latin American Humanities (3-0-3)
The goal of this course is to give the student an appreciation 
of Latin American civilizations as vital cultures with their own 
traditions, customs, values, ideals, ethics and myths, and 
an understanding of their relationship to other civilizations. 
This course is an interdisciplinary study of the cultural 
accomplishments of Latin America from its pre- Columbian 
beginnings to the present. The artistic, literary, musical, and 
philosophical movements and creators will be emphasized to 
provide a comprehensive understanding of the development 
and influence of Latin American culture. May be taken 
as credit for Humanities General Education Requirements. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or Concurrent Enrollment. 
HUM 2343  Classical Mythology (3-0-3) 
This course is primarily a study of Greco-Roman myth, 
saga, and society, with an emphasis on literary aspects and 
significance of myth. May be taken as credit for Humanities 
General Education Requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or 
current enrollment.
HUM 
2423 
 
Global 
Cultural 
Experience 
(3-0-3) 
This course is designed to acquaint the student with 
cultures of Africa, Asia, India, and Latin America including 
art, literature, music, theater, and other forms of creative 
expression.  To experience these cultures, attendance at 
a variety of cultural events is required.  May be taken 
as credit for Humanities General Education Requirements.  
Prerequisite:  ENGL 1113 or Concurrent Enrollment. 
 
HUM 2603  Study Tour in Humanities (3-0-3)
This course is designed to acquaint the student with the 
evolution of culture through a survey of the major cultural, 
socio-political, creative, and philosophical/religious aspects. 
Each time this course is offered, it will concentrate on one or 
more destinations for that particular year's short-term study 
experience. Each year the focus destination would change. 
Enrollment and attendance in the current study tour are 
required. Students may repeat the course in different content 
areas for Humanities credit. The area of emphasis defines the 
content focus. Permission of professor required.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
356

Humanities Learning Community (HULC)
HULC 1091  CLICK Learning Community (0-1-1)
This course is designed to increase student success by 
increasing retention and academic performance. CLICK 
(Community Learning in Critical Knowledge) Learning 
Community focuses on improving critical thinking skills, 
learning strategies, organizational skills, computer literacy, 
mathematics, reading skills, grammar, writing skills, and 
student knowledge of available resources both on and off 
campus.
Interdisciplinary Studies  (INDS)
INDS 0333  Foundations Bridge Program (3-0-3)
This course is intended for students whose placement scores 
fall within the developmental range for English, reading and/
or math. The course consists of an intense review of the 
skills necessary for success in college-level courses required 
for completing a degree program at Rose State College. 
Students will work extensively on their own problem areas 
in order to eliminate the need for multiple developmental 
courses.
Languages (LANG)
LANG 1003 Basic Language Conversation (Variable) (3-0-3)
This is the first introductory language conversation course. 
It is an introduction to the target language with a focus on 
listening and speaking, providing intensive practice in the 
language on topics of everyday life. This should be taken 
by students who have never studied the language and who 
want to learn basic conversational patterns. Students may 
repeat this course in different languages. 
LANG 1115  Elementary Language I (Variable) (5-0-5)
This course is an introduction to a world language. 
Through study of the language’s grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation, this course emphasizes the development of 
speaking, writing, reading, and understanding the target 
language at a novice level while developing an appreciation 
of life in the countries and regions where the language 
is spoken. Students may repeat the course in different 
languages. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or concurrent enrollment. 
LANG 1225  Elementary Language II (Variable) (5-0-5)
This course is a continuation of Elementary Language 
I. Through study of the target language’s grammar, 
vocabulary, and pronunciation, this course emphasizes 
the continuing development of speaking, writing, reading, 
and understanding the language at a novice level while 
developing an appreciation of life in the countries and 
regions where the language is spoken. Student may repeat 
the course in different languages. Prerequisite: LANG 1115 of 
the same language.
LANG 2091-5  Special Topics in Languages (Variable)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in 
languages. May be repeated with different topics and 
languages.
LANG 2113  Intermediate Language I (Variable) (3-0-3)
This course concentrates on the solidification and expansion 
of the language skills learned at the elementary level. 
Emphasis is on using the language in varying situations 
through readings, conversations, and compositions. Students 
may repeat the course in different languages. Prerequisite: 
LANG 1225 of the same language.
LANG 2223  Intermediate Language II (Variable) (5-0-3)
This course is a continuation of LANG 2113. Through more 
advanced readings, conversations, and compositions, 
students will successfully achieve an intermediate level of 
ability to use the language in speaking, writing, reading, and 
understanding of the language. Students may repeat the 
course in different languages. Prerequisite: LANG 2113 of the 
same language. 
Leadership (LEAD)
LEAD 1103  Introduction to Diversity (3-0-3)
Introduces learners to the study of diversity from a local 
to a global environment using a holistic, interdisciplinary 
approach. Encourages self-exploration and prepares the 
learner to work in a diverse environment. In addition to 
an analysis of majority/minority relations in a multicultural 
context, the primary topics of race, ethnicity, age, gender, 
class, sexual orientation, disability, religion are explored. 
Introduction to the issues, concepts, theories and research 
of diversity studies. Topics include race, class, gender, 
oppression and suppression, ethnicity, and privilege. 
LEAD 1203 Leadership in the Arts (3-0-3)
In this course, students examine different views of leadership 
as it pertains to arts and cultural organizations in order 
to gain a better understanding of the unique issues and 
challenges such groups face.  Using diverse instructional 
material (case studies, readings, podcasts, video and films, 
speakers, etc.), students explore the concepts of personal 
and institutional social responsibility and responsiveness, the 
process of establishing shared vision, ethical reasoning and 
its tools, methods for team building and decision making, as 
well as how to investigate and handle conflict in the art world. 
LEAD 2093 Special Topics in Leadership (3-0-3)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in 
leadership. May be repeated with different topics. Permission 
of professor may be required.
 
LEAD 2103  Lessons in Leadership (3-0-3)
The purpose of this class is student leadership growth and 
development through learning and experiential components. 
Included are a speaker series and team projects that will 
assist students in learning from current leaders, help them 
develop critical reflection skills, and develop lifelong abilities 
in citizenship, engagement and service.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
357

LEAD 2113  Introduction to Leadership (3-0-3)
In this course, students examine different views of leadership 
and how to establish the foundation for a personal leadership 
philosophy. Through a combination of case studies, readings, 
podcasts, videos, and films, students explore the concepts 
of personal and institutional social responsibility and 
responsiveness, the process of establishing shared vision, 
ethical reasoning and its tools, methods for team building 
and decision making, as well as how to investigate and 
handle conflict. 
LEAD 2901 Leadership in Practice (1-0-1)
In this course, students focus on one of two options related 
to leadership in practice or application to finalize their 
embedded Certificate in Leadership--(1) a mentoring or 
shadowing program in which students mirror a leader in their 
chosen field or (2) a process of documenting the student's 
own leadership in practice with a particular organization.  The 
course instructor will help guide the students in choosing 
between the two options and finding a mentor to shadow if 
option 1 is selected.  Prerequisite:  LEAD 2103 or LEAD 2113.
Leadership (LEAD), continued
Paralegal Studies (LS)
LS 2703 Criminal Law (3-0-3)
Criminal Law is a course that provides the student with an 
understanding of the fundamentals of criminal law and a 
practical understanding and working knowledge about how 
criminal cases proceed in municipal, state, and federal courts 
and agencies.  Prerequisites:  LS 2813; acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Sp]
 
LS 2713 Constitutional Rights (3-0-3)
A study of rights arising from the United State Constitution, 
with an emphasis on their importance for paralegals in the 
fields of civil, criminal, and government practice.  Prerequisites:  
LS 2813; acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Su]
 
LS 2773 Open Legal Topics (3-0-3)
This course is the study of law in an area of current interest 
and importance to a paralegal, where the participation of 
those directly working or interested in that area would be 
mutually beneficial to all participants.  Students with an 
interest in the area of law may enroll in the course.  This 
course may be repeated for up to a total of six credit hours.
LS 2783 Child Support Processes (3-0-3)
This class focuses on the legal processes related to child 
support.  Students will be able to identify how private litigants 
and public child support agencies locate parents, establish 
paternity, establish child support orders, calculate and collect 
support, and understand the interactions with other social 
service programs and state agencies.  Prerequisites:  LS 
2813; acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa]
 
LS 2793  Selected Legal Topics (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of topics of current interest and 
importance to the paralegal, including recent changes in 
legislation. This course may be repeated for up to a total of 
6 credit hours. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: 
LS 2813 and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. 
LS 2803  Introduction to Law (3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to the legal system. It will 
provide an overview of the judicial system and its relationship 
to legislative bodies and administrative agencies. This course 
will examine the training and purpose of legal personnel with 
emphasis on the role of the legal assistant. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2813  Legal Research & Writing I (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of the use of federal and state 
statutes, federal and state court cases, agency rules, 
secondary legal publications, proper methods of citing, and 
preparation of a legal memorandum. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee 
at cost. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 and LS 2803 or concurrent 
enrollment in both, and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies 
Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2823  Legal Research & Writing II (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the use of computer-assisted legal 
research of primary and secondary legal source materials, 
legal reasoning and writing analysis, and preparation of legal 
memorandum and brief. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. 
Prerequisites: LS 2813, ENGL 1213 or concurrent enrollment, 
and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2833  Word Processing for the Legal Profession (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of word processing software to 
prepare paralegals to create specialized law office and 
court documents. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and 
acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2843  Law Office Practice & Procedures (3-0-3)
This course is a study of theories of law office management, 
forms of organization of a law practice, human resources, 
timekeeping, billing, client interviewing, law office accounting, 
docket control, ethical concerns, law office equipment, and 
space management. Prerequisites: LS 2813 or concurrent 
enrollment, and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies 
Program. [Fa]
LS 2853  Civil Procedure I (3-0-3)
This course is a study of both state and federal civil 
procedure, including forum selection, analysis of jurisdiction 
and venue requirements, necessary parties, and preparation 
of pleadings. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: 
LS 2823 or concurrent enrollment and acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2863  Civil Procedure II (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of both state and federal evidence, 
discovery methods and organization for effective presentation 
at trial with emphasis on the role of the paralegal in 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
358

discovery and trial preparation. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee 
at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2853 and acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2873  Contracts (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of the general principles of the law 
of contracts, with emphasis on the drafting and revising 
contracts, documents, and forms. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee 
at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
 
LS 2883  Torts (3-0-3)
This course is a study of negligence, products liability, and 
intentional torts with emphasis on the role of the paralegal 
in the preparation and trial of a tort suit. Fee: Westlaw™ Next 
fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Sp]
LS 2893  Bankruptcy (3-0-3)
This course is a study of federal bankruptcy law with 
emphasis on the role of the paralegal in this area of the law. 
Prerequisites: LS 2813; acceptance into the Paralegal Studies 
Program. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. [Sp]
LS 2903  Information Management in the Law (3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to computer technology 
and its applications within the law firm, including the use 
of computers related to paralegal functions in litigation 
support, case management, time and billing, and electronic 
spreadsheet applications. Lab fee: $10. Fee: Westlaw™ Next 
fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and acceptance into the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
LS 2913  Wills & Trusts (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the principles of law applicable to 
wills and trusts with emphasis on the role of the paralegal 
in drafting wills, testamentary trusts, and inter vivos trusts. 
Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and 
acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa]
LS 2923  Business Organizations (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of the principles of law applicable 
to various business entities, including sole proprietorships, 
partnerships and corporations. Emphasis is placed on the 
role of the paralegal in the preparation of documents and 
forms necessary to form and operate the various entities. 
Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and 
acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa]
LS 2933  Estate Administration (3-0-3)
This course is a study of estate administration in Oklahoma 
with emphasis on the role of the paralegal in the preparation 
of documents, accounting, and estate tax returns. Fee: 
Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and 
acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Sp]
LS 2943  Paralegal Internship (Variable)
This course is a supervised on-the-job training experience 
in an appropriate legal environment, i.e., private law firm, 
government agency, nonprofit corporation, or corporate legal 
department. Prerequisites: Approval of Paralegal Studies 
Program Director and Supervising Attorney.
LS 2953  Domestic Relations (3-0-3)
This course is a study of family law, including marriage, divorce, 
annulment, separate maintenance, adoption, and custody 
actions. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 
2813 and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Sp] 
LS 2963  Real Property (3-0-3)
This course is a study of the principles of law applicable to 
real property transactions and conveyances, title and forms 
of land ownership, legal descriptions, recording requirements, 
closing procedures, liens and causes of action pertaining to 
real property. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 
2813 and acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Sp]
 
LS 2973  Administrative Law (3-0-3) 
A study of the substantive and procedural aspects of 
client representation before state and federal agencies. 
Prerequisites: LS 2813; acceptance into the Paralegal Studies 
Program. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. [Fa]
LS 2983  Debtor-Creditor Law (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of state collection remedies 
and procedures with emphasis on the role of the 
paralegal in the debtor-creditor area of the law. Fee: 
Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: LS 2813 and 
acceptance into the Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa] 
LS 2993  Capstone Seminar (3-0-3)
This course is a comprehensive review of legal ethics, 
legal analysis, terminology, legal research, interviewing, 
and substantive areas of law, including litigation, contracts, 
business organizations, administrative law, family law, criminal 
law, real estate law, and estate planning and administration, 
emphasizing student integration of the knowledge of 
theoretical concepts with practical workplace applications 
through case analysis and the completion of assigned 
projects. The seminar places emphasis on critical thinking 
and problem solving skills to enable students to increase 
their proficiency in legal writing, reading, interviewing, and 
listening skills. Fee: Westlaw™ Next fee at cost. Prerequisites: 
LS 2823, LS 2863 or concurrent enrollment, and acceptance 
into the Paralegal Studies Program It is recommended that 
the student take this course in his/her last semester of the 
Paralegal Studies Program. [Fa,Sp]
Paralegal Studies (LS), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
359

Library Technical Assistant (LTA)
LTA 1303  Special Publications (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to familiarize the student with 
materials unique to the medical, government, legal, and 
genealogical fields. It will introduce the unique terminology of 
those fields, including MESH terminology, legal citations, and 
genealogy research methods and sources. It will also look 
at the Superintendent of Documents catalogs and indexes, 
the National Library of Medicine, the Government Printing 
Office and its functions and operation. Federal statutes and 
Supreme Court documents, the depository library system; 
state and local documents will also be covered, as well as 
ordering, acquisition and cataloging records; indexing, data  
bases and microforms. This course is delivered only via the 
internet.
LTA 1312 Library Services for Children & Young Adults 
(2-0-2) 
This course is designed to familiarize the student with the 
basic library services offered to children and young adults. It 
covers various programs offered in public libraries and school 
media centers, reading programs, gaming and technology, 
storytelling, publicity, book talks, service and information 
needs, and a brief survey of basic children and young adult 
materials, both print and non-print. This course is delivered 
only via the internet. 
LTA 1313  Introduction to Library Public Services (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to familiarize the student with the 
programs and materials available to libraries and virtual 
libraries which serve the needs of library patrons. This course 
includes coverage of library terminology, general library 
organization, patron interaction, materials and resources, 
information and referral, interlibrary loan and circulation. This 
course is delivered only via the internet. 
LTA 1322  Introduction to the Library Paraprofessional 
Field (2-0-2)
This course serves as an overview to the work of the Library 
Technical Assistant. It will look at a brief history of libraries 
and librarianship and the possible jobs, salaries, and types of 
libraries in which the LTA employee might find him/herself. It 
will also look at professional organizations within the library 
field and issues of importance to libraries, such as the Library 
Bill of Rights, the Freedom to Read, censorship, etc. This 
course is delivered only via the internet.
LTA 1323  Introduction to Library Technical Services (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to familiarize the student with 
the fundamentals of technical services and working with 
library collections. This includes learning the role of library 
technical assistants and support staff, library terminology and 
technology, acquistions, cataloging, physical processing, and 
local policies for collection development and management. 
LTA 1333  Technology in Libraries (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to acquaint the student with current 
and emerging technological resources in the library field. It 
will cover usage and set-up of a variety of devices used to 
present audio, visual, digital and other non-print resources to 
library users and library staff. It will include basic procedures 
for evaluating and maintaining those devices, both hardware 
and software, including accessibility hardware and software. 
Ways to use these resources in normal library activities will 
be addressed. It will also acquaint the student with ways 
to keep updated with advances in the field. This course is 
delivered only via the internet.
LTA 1343  Records Management (3-0-3)
This course is designed to familiarize the student with an 
overview of the practice of records management (RM): the 
systematic control of information resources in any format, 
from creation through use, storage, and final disposition. 
Students will learn how records and information management 
programs contribute to the efficiency (and legal compliance, 
occasionally) of any type of organization (government, 
enterprise, non-profit). Upon completion of the course, 
students should understand what records management is and 
the importance of RM in any organization; the components of 
a formal RM program and the benefits of implementing an RM 
program; RM as a profession and opportunities in the filed. 
This course is delivered only via the internet. 
LTA 1353  Library Management Skills (3-0-3)
A course designed to familiarize the student with management 
skills needed in a library setting. Includes a study of the 
qualities necessary for library managerial success: planning, 
organizing, directing, controlling, and communicating. This 
course is delivered only via the internet.
LTA 2001  Capstone Project (0-2-1)
This exit/assessment  portfolio is required of all Library Technical 
Assistant majors. Enrollment in this class and completion of 
the portfolio is to be done during the student's final semester 
before graduation or upon completion of the LTA courses. 
Prerequisites: Successful completion of required LTA courses 
or upon completion of a minimum of 4 required LTA courses 
and with concurrent enrollment in the remaining LTA courses. 
LTA 2091-3  Special Topics in Library Technical Assistant 
(Variable)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in library 
technical assistant program. Permission of professor required. 
This course is delivered only via the internet.
LTA 2191-3  Library Technical Assistant Internship 
(Variable)
A supervised on-the-job training experience in an appropriate 
approved setting: college library, school library, or special 
library. Student must have completed a majority of major 
coursework, with a minimum GPA of 2.5. Permission of 
professor required. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
360

Management (MGMT)
MGMT 2103  Principles of Management (3-0-3) 
Introduces the systematic approach to examine the functions 
of management: planning, organizing, leading, and controlling. 
Includes a study of the qualities necessary for managerial 
success. [Fa,Sp,Su]
MGMT 2113  Office Management (3-0-3) 
The purpose of Office Management is to acquaint the student 
with the controlling of office activities and services. Special 
emphasis will be given to the principles of time management, 
people management, equipment management, information 
management, and facility management. [Fa,Sp]
MGMT 2153  Teambuilding & Conflict Management (3-0-3)
This course is designed to acquaint the student with the 
concepts and practices involved in developing and managing 
teams at the workplace. It examines the role of self-directed 
teams and how to make the transition from the traditional  
 
organizational structure to a self-directed team-based 
organization. [Sp]
MGMT 2203  Human Resources Management (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to acquaint the student with 
the role played by management in the development of 
human resources. Particular attention is given to the role of 
government legislation as it pertains to initial interviewing 
and hiring through the appraisal and promotion steps. Focus 
is also on union-management relations, career development, 
and all compensation plans. [Fa,Sp,Su]
MGMT 2313  Introduction to Management Information 
Systems (MIS) (3-0-3)
Introductory course in which students explore the role 
of informational systems in business organizations and 
how 
these 
informational 
systems 
are 
developed 
according to managerial/organizational needs. In addition, 
students will study the functions and uses of software 
technologies and computer hardware that businesses use 
in order to solve their information systems needs. [Fa,Sp] 
 
MGMT 2403  Purchasing & Procurement (3-0-3)
This course is designed to teach students some of the 
essential skills and knowledge needed in the purchasing 
and procurement roles within a business operation. Students 
will study the internal and external relationships with other 
company activities and with suppliers and how to manage the 
flow of materials and services through the firm. [Fa]
MGMT 2503  Project Management (3-0-3)
This course is designed to teach students some of the essential 
skills and knowledge needed in Project Management: 
organizational skills, team management, project bids, the 
types of projects tasks, and the project life cycle. Project 
Management will facilitate the student's understanding of 
both client and contractor goals in various industries. [Sp]
MGMT 2603  Production & Operations Management (3-0-3)
This course will provide an overview of first line industrial 
management concepts where the primary concern is 
production/manufacturing. The student will be introduced 
to various industrial/production/manufacturing concepts, 
such as competitiveness, strategy, productivity, product and 
service design, strategic capacity planning, process selection 
and facility layout, work design and measurement, and 
location planning and analysis. [Sp]
MGMT 2703  Small Business Management (3-0-3) 
This course will include setting up simple accounting 
procedures, managing a small retail establishment or running 
a small manufacturing plant, basic principles of personnel, 
merchandising, and promotion, with possibly a small amount 
of quantitative analysis. [Sp]
 
MGMT 2803  Supply Chain Management & Logistics (3-0-3)
Students will be introduced to the key concepts of the analysis 
and management of supply chain and logistics as they relate 
to: consumer-focused supply chain, inventory management, 
information 
systems, 
transportation, 
warehousing, 
logistics relationships and supply chain strategy. [Fa] 
 
MGMT 2903  Management Seminar (3-0-3) 
Designed to correlate classroom training with actual business 
situations. Examination of various business problems through 
utilization of group projects and case problems. May be taken 
one time only for 3 credit hours. 
MKTG 1503  Concepts of Selling (3-0-3)
A course to examine the fundamentals of selling, including 
approaching the customer, creating interest in and desire for 
the product, closing the sale, and utilization of psychological 
principles in customer relations. [Fa,Sp,Su]
MKTG 2103  Principles of Marketing (3-0-3)
Study of the movement of goods and services from producer 
to consumer. Includes functions of marketing such as pricing, 
product promotion, distribution channels, market research 
and an overview of legal ramifications. [Fa,Sp,Su]
MKTG 2113  Digital Marketing Essentials (3-0-3)
This course will introduce students to the key concepts of 
on- and off-site SEO (Search Engine Optimization), paid 
search marketing, online advertising, web analytics, and 
e-mail marketing. Additionally, content includes social media 
marketing, web design, and online reputation management. 
Fee $10. Crosslisted with MCOM 2113. [Fa]
MKTG 2213  Principles of Advertising (3-0-3)
As a survey course of the world of advertising and its place 
in the business world and society, advertising is studied from 
three viewpoints: management-marketing, communications-
creativity, and the consumer-citizen. The course includes 
the study of the art and science of advertising strategy and 
tactics as well as the socioeconomic aspects of advertising. 
Crosslisted with MCOM 2213. [Sp]
Marketing (MKTG)
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
361

Mathematics (MATH)
NOTE: Rose State College is committed to the academic 
success of its students. Appropriate placement is a vital 
element to each student’s success. A student’s placement 
scores (within 3 years) through high school GPA, ACT, SAT, 
or Next Generation ACCUPLACER adequately determine 
college-level readiness as well as the ability to exhibit skills 
in performing various math competencies ranging from 
arithmetic to intermediate algebra. Based on placement 
scores, developmental courses may be required before a 
student is eligible for college-level courses.
MATH 0124 Foundations of Math (4-0-4)
This course provides a review of arithmetic and algebra 
topics which include: place value, estimation, operations 
with fractions, integers, and percents, order of operations, 
simplifying variable expressions, solving linear equations, 
and proportions. Additional topics include an introduction into 
formulas, rules of exponents, and graphing lines. Students 
who successfully complete this course with a grade of C or 
higher are then eligible to take MATH 0144 or MATH 1473.
MATH 0141  General College Math Studio (1-0-1)
This course is designed for students who intend to enroll in 
MATH 1473 but whose placement scores indicate a need to 
review the math skills necessary to meet college standards. 
Topics include place value, fraction operations, percent, 
order of operations, simple equation solving, and calculator 
skills. Prerequisite: ACT MATH score of 17, 18, or equivalent.
MATH 0144  Algebraic Literacy (4-0-4)
This course includes a study of operations on real numbers; 
operations on polynomial, rational, and radical expressions; 
factoring polynomials; solving linear, polynomial, rational, 
and radical equations having real or complex solutions; 
solving linear and compound inequalities; and graphing 
linear equations. Additional topics include applications of 
concepts and problem solving. Students who successfully 
complete this course with a grade of C or higher are then 
eligible to take MATH 1513 or MATH 1483. Prerequisite: MATH 
0124 or equivalent.
MATH 0151  College Algebra Studio (1-0-1)
This course is designed for students who intend to enroll in 
MATH 1513 but whose placement scores indicate a need to 
review the math skills necessary to meet college standards. 
Topics include functions; factoring; simplifying expressions 
and solving equations containing polynomials, rationals, and 
radicals. Prerequisite: ACT MATH score of 18 or equivalent.
MATH 0181  Functions & Modeling Studio (1-0-1)
This course is designed for students who intend to enroll in 
MATH 1483, but whose placement scores indicate a need to 
review the math skills necessary to meet college standards. 
Topics include functions in multiple representations, function 
notation, types of functions with emphasis on linear equations, 
and rates of change. Prerequisite: An ACT MATH score of 
17/18 or equivalent.
MATH 1473  General College Math (3-0-3)
This course explores the mathematics needed for the critical 
evaluation of quantitative information. Topics include set 
theory, symbolic logic, consumer mathematics, geometry 
and measurement, probability, and statistics. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of MATH 0124 with a grade of C or 
better or satisfactory assessment score for MATH 1473.
MATH 1483  Functions & Modeling (3-0-3)
This course includes a study of functions and their graphs, 
with special emphasis on polynomial, rational, exponential, 
and logarithmic functions from the viewpoint of rates of 
change. It explores linear, quadratic, exponential, logarithmic, 
and other functions with applications to the natural sciences, 
agriculture, business, and the social sciences. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of MATH 0144 with a grade of C or 
better OR satisfactory assessment score for MATH 1483.
MATH 1513  College Algebra (3-0-3)
This course includes a study of functions and their graphs, 
with special emphasis on polynomial, rational, absolute 
value, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Additional 
topics include systems of equations, matrices, determinants, 
and conics. MATH 1473 (or its equivalent) does not fulfill 
the prerequisite for this course. Prerequisite: Successful 
completion of MATH 0144 with a grade of C or better OR 
satisfactory assessment score for MATH 1513.
MATH 1613  Plane Trigonometry (3-0-3) 
A study of trigonometric functions with applications in the 
solving of triangles and trigonometric identities. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1513 or concurrent enrollment.
MATH 1715  Pre-calculus (5-0-5)
This course consists of the study of algebraic and trigonometric 
topics including polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, 
and trigonometric functions and their graphs. Conic sections, 
polar coordinates, and other topics of analytic geometry will 
be included. Prerequisite: MATH 0144 or equivalent.
MATH 1743  Calculus I for Business, Life & Social Sciences 
(3-0-3) 
This course includes a study of differential and integral 
calculus of elementary functions including: polynomial, radical, 
rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions; with the 
associated applications. For Business, Social Sciences and 
certain Life Sciences. Not for Math, Engineering and Physical 
Science majors.  Prerequisite: MATH 1483 or equivalent.
MATH 1914  Differential & Integral Calculus I (4-0-4)
This course is a study of limits and defining the derivative 
using limits; differentiation of basic and transcendental 
functions; applications of derivatives to curve sketching, 
extrema, and related rates. It also includes the study of 
integrations and applications of integrations to solve basic 
geometrical applications. Prerequisites: MATH 1513 and 
MATH 1613 or MATH 1715 (C or better).
MATH 2013  Structures of Mathematics (3-0-3)
This course is a study of number sense and numeration, sets, 
relations, patterns, whole numbers, and integers.  The course 
is specifically designed to help prospective teachers gain 
an understanding of the underlying concepts of elementary 
mathematics and teaching strategies.  Enrollment will 
reserved for students majoring in Pre-Education or Family 
Services and Child Development.  This course will not 
satisfy the General Education Math requirement at Rose 
State College. Prerequisite:  MATH 0144 or equivalent 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
362

Mathematics (MATH), continued
MATH 2023  Foundations of Geometry & Measurement 
(3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to geometric notation, and a 
study of constructions, measurements, similarity, congruence, 
translations, rotations, and reflections.  The course is designed 
to give prospective elementary teachers an understanding of 
the basic geometric concepts as well as an understanding 
of the teaching strategies used with elementary students.  
Enrollment will be reserved for students majoring in Pre-
Education or Family Services and Child Development.  
This course will not satisfy the General Education Math 
requirements at Rose State College.  Prerequisite:  MATH 
0144 or equivalent.
MATH 2033  Analysis of Data & Chance (3-0-3)
This course is a study of rational numbers, decimal notation, 
real numbers, probability, and statistics.  Applications in the 
field of education will be emphasized.  Enrollment will be 
reserved for students majoring in Pre-Education or Family 
Services and Child Development.  This course will not satisfy 
the General Education Math requirement at Rose State 
College.  Prerequisite:  MATH 0144 or equivalent.
MATH 2083  Introduction to Statistics for Engineering & 
Sciences (3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to the theory of statistics 
and its applications including graphical representation of 
data, descriptive statistics, basic probability, binomial and 
normal distributions, the distribution of the sampling mean, 
confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, regression, and 
correlation. Statistical applications in the fields of engineering, 
physical sciences, and biological sciences will be emphasized 
in this course. Prerequisite: MATH 0144 with a grade of C or 
better or equivalent.
MATH 2091-6  Special Topics in Mathematics (Variable)
Directed individual study of special topics and special 
courses in mathematics.  Also, this course may be used to 
offer special math courses to public school teachers and 
to other select groups of the community.  Prerequisite:  
Special permission by Engineering & Science Dean with 
recommendation from Math Coordinator.
MATH 2103  Discrete Mathematics (3-0-3)
This course introduces a variety of topics which include 
logic, set theory, combinatorics, sequences, series, 
induction, relations and their properties, graph theory, 
modular arithmetic, and applications such as cryptography. 
Prerequisite: Successful completion of MATH 1914 with a 
grade of C or better or equivalent.
MATH 2213  Fundamentals of Data Science (3-0-3)
This course provides an introduction to the interdisciplinary 
field of data science.  This course will emphasize practical 
techniques to gain information and understanding 
of data.  Topics include but are not limited to cleaning, 
preparing, transforming, exploring and analyzing data; 
statistical inference; statistical models; visualizations; and 
communicating results.  R and/or Python programming 
language will be used throughout the course.  Examples and 
data sets from various areas will be discussed.  Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of CIT 1173 or CIT 1613, MATH 1914 and 
MATH 2083 with a grade of C or better.
MATH 2924  Differential & Integral Calculus II (4-0-4)
This course is a continuation of Differential and Integral 
Calculus I. It includes additional integration techniques and 
applications and covers the study of infinite sequences and 
series, as well as analytic geometry topics of polar forms, 
parametric equations, and vectors. Prerequisite: MATH 1914 
(C or better).
MATH 2934  Differential & Integral Calculus III (4-0-4)
This course is a continuation of Differential and Integral 
Calculus II. It is a vector calculus course with topics including 
multivariate and vector calculus; moments and centroids; 
surface area; volume; line and surface integrals; and the 
theorems of Green, Stokes, and Gauss. Prerequisite: MATH 
2924 (C or better).
 
MATH 2973  Introduction to Ordinary Differential 
Equations (3-0-3) 
This course is an introductory course in differential equations. 
Topics include homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear 
equations and nonlinear equations, Laplace transforms, 
power series, and applications of differential equations. 
Prerequisite: Successful completion of MATH 2934 with a 
grade of C or better or concurrent enrollment.
Mass Communication (MCOM)
MCOM 1103  Introduction to Mass Media (3-0-3)
Survey and history of mass communication theories and 
practices, including economic, social and political evolution 
of interrelationships of media with society.  
MCOM 1123  Social Media Tools & Strategies (3-0-3)
This course will provide students with the essentials of using 
the most popular social media tools and leveraging those 
tools in combination to multiply their potential audience. The 
student will be introduced to strategies and tactics of using 
the tools to enhance the impact of their message. Armed with 
this new media equation, individuals and businesses of all 
sizes can reach a global audience. Lab fee: $10. Crosslisted 
with MULT 1123.
MCOM 1203  Media Writing (2-2-3)
Introduction to various writing styles and techniques used by 
media professionals, with a focus on gathering, organizing, and 
presenting information to audiences. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: 
“C” or better in ENGL 1113 or concurrent enrollment.
MCOM 1213  Public Speaking (3-0-3)
This course is designed to introduce students to the process, 
concepts, and principles fundamental to formal and informal 
oral communication. Students are required to demonstrate 
speech development and presentation skills in a variety of 
evaluated speaking assignments. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
363

Mass Communication (MCOM), continued
MCOM 1401  Mass Media Practicum (0-3-1)
Participation in the production of the college’s student-run 
newspaper, podcast or another Rose State student-led 
publication. A maximum of 3 hours credit toward Support 
and Related Requirements may be earned. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: “C” or better in MCOM 1203.
MCOM 1413  Digital Imaging (3-0-3)
This introductory course will provide a basic foundation in 
the use of electronic techniques to select, manipulate, and 
edit images, work with masks, channels and layers, combine 
raster and vector graphics, and manage color. Students 
must have knowledge of file management. Lab fee: $10. 
Crosslisted with MULT 1413.
MCOM 2003  State Capitol Reporting (3-0-3) 
This course will teach the fundamentals of State Capitol 
reporting through on-the-ground observation, interaction and 
coverage of the Oklahoma Legislature and executive branch. 
Prerequisite:  MCOM 1103 or permission of professor.
MCOM 2091-3  Special Topics in Mass Communication 
(Variable)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in 
mass communication. May be repeated with different 
topics. Permission of professor may be required. 
MCOM 2113  Digital Marketing Essentials (3-0-3) 
This course will introduce students to the key concepts 
of on- and off-site SEO (search engine optimization), paid 
search marketing, online advertising, web analytics, and 
e-mail marketing. Additionally, content includes social media 
marketing, web design, and online reputation management. 
Lab fee: $10. Crosslisted with MKTG 2113.
MCOM 2203  News Reporting (2-2-3)
The continuation of MCOM 1203, this course focuses on 
reporting and writing stories for print and online publications 
utilizing more advanced techniques.  Students will practice 
interviewing, researching, writing on deadline, conforming 
to Associated Press style, and editing their stories, as well 
as those of their peers, contributing content for publication 
in the student newspaper or online edition.  Prerequisite:  C 
or better in MCOM 1203.  Lab fee: $10.  This course is only 
offered during the spring semester each academic year.
 
MCOM 2213  Principles of Advertising (3-0-3)
As a survey course of the world of advertising and its place 
in the business world and society, advertising is studied from 
three viewpoints: management-marketing, communications-
creativity, and the consumer-citizen. The course includes 
the study of the art and science of advertising strategy and 
tactics as well as the socioeconomic aspects of advertising. 
Crosslisted with MKTG 2213.
MCOM 2323  Principles of Public Relations (3-0-3)
An overview of the public relations profession, focusing on 
definitions, history, theory, practices, case studies, ethics, 
law, and career opportunities in the field.  This course is only 
offered during the fall semester each academic year.
MCOM 2333  Layout & Graphic Design (3-0-3)
Students will learn current desktop publishing software for 
the purpose of designing publications for various journalism 
and business outlets, including public relations, advertising, 
print media, and corporate communications.  Students must 
know how to navigate in a computerized environment and 
be familiar with basic word processing software.  Students 
will create page designs for the student-led newspaper, 
promotional materials and Rose State publications.  This 
course is cross-listed with MULT 2333.  This course is only 
offered during the spring semester each academic year.
MCOM 2413  Digital Photography (3-0-3)
Digital Photography is a study of the digital photographic 
medium as artistic expression and its applications in the world 
of news and commercial photography. Students receive 
instruction in digital photography and computer applications, 
and produce professional-level projects using current digital 
photo and computer equipment. An adjustable digital camera 
is required for this course. This course specifically supports 
students pursuing digital production, web design, and 
journalism and mass communication. Skills will be developed 
in taking photographs and also building a portfolio. A 
student-provided adjustable digital camera is required. Some 
knowledge of Photoshop is helpful. Fall MCOM 2413 uses 
Mac, and Spring MULT 2413 uses PC (Windows). Lab fee: $10. 
This course is crosslisted with MULT 2413.  
MCOM 2503  Media Production (1-3-3)
Basic techniques for the planning, shooting and editing 
of audio, video and online media. Coursework features 
field camera operation, audio and video recording, basic 
lighting techniques, and computer editing of audio and video 
media, as well as following a basic script. Course includes 
a laboratory component. Lab fee: $10.  This course is cross-
listed with FSDM 2503 and MULT 2503.  (This course is only 
offered during the fall semester each academic year.)
MCOM 2513  Screenwriting (3-0-3)
This course introduces screenwriting, focusing on features, 
shorts, television, and documentary screenwriting.  Students 
will learn theory, aspects of a story, structure, character, 
and the steps of the screenwriting process.  Students 
will examine previously produced scripts and films.  They 
will then apply the knowledge gained and use the steps 
of the screenwriting process to develop finalized scripts. 
 
MCOM 2603  Video News (1-3-3)
Techniques and practice of news gathering/reporting and 
production.  Students will become familiar with remote 
lighting requirements, subjective techniques, remote 
video acquisition, and computer video editing techniques.  
Prerequisite:  C or better in MCOM 2503 or concurrent 
enrollment.  Lab fee $10.  (This course is only offered 
during the spring semester of each academic year.) 
 
MCOM 2801-3  Mass Communication Internship (Variable)
Student- or professor-arranged internship in an area of mass 
communication. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credit 
hours. Permission of professor required. MULT 2801-3 will not 
meet the requirements needed to graduate with a degree in 
Mass Communication.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
364

Meteorology (METR)
METR 1003  Introduction to Atmospheric Science (3-0-3)
This meteorology course for atmospheric science majors in 
the Geoscience program introduces students to important 
physical properties that occur in the Earth's atmosphere. 
This course focuses on atmospheric radiation, heat, 
thermodynamics, stability, moisture, clouds and precipitation. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 and MATH 1613; or MATH 1715.
METR 1121  Introduction to Meteorology Laboratory (1-0-1)
A general meteorology lab designed to accompany METR 
1123. This course will cover applications relevant to the nature 
of the atmosphere and weather phenomena. Analyzing 
data and weather patterns peculiar to Oklahoma will be 
studied. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: METR 1123 or concurrent 
enrollment.
METR 1123  Introduction to Meteorology (3-0-3)
An introductory survey of the nature of the atmosphere and 
the weather phenomena produced by the interaction of the 
atmospheric elements of heat, moisture, pressure, and wind. 
Special emphasis will be placed on the weather phenomena 
and patterns particular to Oklahoma. Prerequisite: MATH 
0124  or equivalent.
METR 2004  Atmospheric Science II (4-0-4)
This meteorology course for atmospheric science majors in 
the Geoscience program introduces students to important 
physical properties that occur in the Earth's atmosphere. This 
course focuses on dynamics, winds, air masses and fronts, 
cyclones, climate, pollution, atmospheric optics and severe 
weather. Prerequisites: METR 1003, MATH 1914, PHYS 2434, 
PHYS 2401 and CHEM 1135.
METR 2802  Basic Forecasting (2-0-2)
Introduction to basic forecasting of weather across the 
nation and in particular Oklahoma. Students will use 
concepts learned in previous meteorology classes to 
develop skill and accuracy in forecasting weather patterns. 
Prerequisites: METR 2004 or concurrent enrollment. 
METR 2901  Capstone (1-0-1)
The capstone course integrates learning from the courses 
in the major with the courses from the rest of the academic 
experience. It requires the application of that learning to 
a project which serves as an instrument of evaluation. 
The project may include: 1) an internship approved by the 
professor; 2) a weekly meteorological discussion/presentation 
of the atmosphere; or, 3) Storm Intercept Team, depending 
on available equipment and professor permission; and, 4) 
a research paper on a professor-approved topic related 
to the atmospheric sciences. Prerequisites: METR 2004 or 
concurrent enrollment, and permission of professor.
MCOM 2901  Mass Communication Capstone (0-3-1)
This course will serve as a program outcomes assessment. 
Students should enroll in this course during the semester they 
plan to graduate and will create a résumé and 2 portfolios of 
their mass communication work. Prerequisites: MCOM 1103, 
MCOM 1203, MCOM 1401, and MCOM 2503, and previous 
completion of or concurrent enrollment in MCOM 2203 and 
MCOM 2603.
Mass Communication (MCOM), continued
Multimedia (MULT)
MULT 1123  Social Media Tools & Strategies (3-0-3)
This course will provide students with the essentials of using 
the most popular social media tools and leveraging those 
tools in combination to multiply their potential audience. The 
student will be introduced to strategies and tactics of using 
the tools to enhance the impact of their message. Armed with 
this new media equation, individuals and businesses of all 
sizes can reach a global audience. Lab fee: $10. Crosslisted 
with MCOM 1123. [Fa,Sp,Su]
MULT 1133  Introduction to Multimedia (3-0-3)
Introduction to the software, hardware, and terminology used 
to create a multimedia application. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp]
 
MULT 1413  Digital Imaging (3-0-3) 
This introductory course will provide a basic foundation in 
the use of electronic techniques to select, manipulate, and 
edit images, work with masks, channels and layers, combine 
raster and vector graphics, and manage color. Students 
must have knowledge of file management. Lab fee: $10. 
Crosslisted with MCOM 1413. [Fa,Sp]
MULT 1423  Advanced Digital Imaging (3-0-3)
An advanced course in digital imaging for those who want 
to create the best possible photographic images using the 
most recent version of Adobe Photoshop. Students will build 
skills in editing images, design, color management, color 
correction, repair, special effects, filters, and advanced image 
manipulation. It is essential for people interested in editing 
images for web design, desktop publishing, illustration, and 
multimedia applications, as well as for those interested in 
editing color images, retouching proofs and photographs, 
or creating original or composite artwork, collages, and 
photo montages. Lab fee: $10. Prerequisite: MULT 1413 or 
permission of professor. [Fa]
MULT 1443  Photo Restoration (3-0-3) 
This course in digital imaging is designed for students who 
have an intermediate knowledge of photo editing software. 
This course prepares students to salvage historical images 
and correct contemporary images that have time or damage 
related issues. Through the use of photo editing software, the 
student will correct the color and/or black and white balance 
of multiple images, modify foregrounds and backgrounds of 
challenging images, correct pixilation content where images 
are distorted, develop high quality images to promote and 
sell products through this dynamic medium, and various 
other editing issues will also be covered. Lab fee: $10. 
Prerequisite: MULT 1413 or professor permission if the 
student can demonstrate that he/she has least a minimum 
of an intermediate skill level with photo editing software. [Fa]
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
365

MULT 1513  Print Design (3-0-3)
Students will learn current desktop publishing software for 
the purpose of designing publications for various journalism 
and business outlets, including public relations, advertising, 
social media, print media, and corporate communications. 
Students must know how to navigate in a computerized 
environment and be familiar with basic word processing 
software. Students will create page designs for the student-led 
newspaper, promotional materials and College publications. 
Lab fee: $10. [Sp]
MULT 1613  Computer Illustration (3-0-3) 
An introductory course to a computer-generated drawing 
program using vector graphics (using the most recent version 
of Adobe Illustrator). Emphasis will be placed on developing 
not only the skills needed to run the software program 
but also on basic text and design projects for illustration, 
desktop publishing, and the web. Various peripheral devices 
will include scanners and color printers. Must have PC skills 
including the use of a mouse and file management using 
Windows or OS X (Mac). Open to any interested student, and 
can be used as an art elective for Art majors. This class is 
required for the Multimedia Communication Certificate and 
AAS degree. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp]
MULT 1913  Animation (3-0-3)
This course will begin with an introduction to creating vector-
drawn shapes, move into vector-based animation with Animate 
CC®, and conclude with an introduction to web interactivity, 
game development, and Action Script®. Lab fee: $10. [Fa,Sp]
MULT 2003  Web Design (3-0-3)
This course is designed to give the student the skills needed 
to create a basic Flash®-driven website or components 
that are inserted into a basic XHTML website. The student 
will bring the elements of sound, movement, interaction, 
graphics, and text together to produce some extraordinary 
results. Interactivity will be taught using built-in ActionScript®. 
Lab fee: $10. [Sp]
 
MULT 2091-4  Special Topics in Multimedia (Variable)
Selected topic(s) from one of the subject areas offered by 
the Business Division. May be repeated for up to a total 
of 4 credit hours. Lab fee: $10. Permission of Dean and/or 
professor required.
 
MULT 2113 3D  Graphic Design (3-0-3)
Students will be introduced to software, theory, principles and 
techniques for creating 3D images and animation used in 3D 
design for multimedia and game design. Lab fee: $10. [Fa]
MULT 2203  Storyboarding (3-0-3)
Concept art is the foundation of game creation. This course 
will look at the basic steps involved in creating game concept 
art. This course will also supply the vision for the game and 
give direction to the development team. Lab fee: $10. [Fa]
MULT 2213  3D Modeling (3-0-3)
This course will establish intermediate-level techniques 
needed to create models, generate textures, and finalize a 
model for use in video applications or as an STL export for 
3D printing. Lab fee: $10. 
MULT 2333  Layout & Graphic Design (3-0-3)
Students will learn current desktop publishing software for the 
purpose of designing publications for various journalism and 
business outlets, including public relations, advertising, print 
media, and corporate communications. Students must know 
how to navigate in a computerized environment and be familiar 
with basic word processing software. Students will create page 
designs for the student-led newspaper, promotional materials 
and Rose State publications. Crosslisted with MCOM 2333. 
MULT 2413  Digital Photography (3-0-3)
Digital Photography is a study of the digital photographic 
medium as artistic expression and its applications in the 
world of news and commercial photography. Students 
receive instruction in digital photography and computer 
applications, and produce professional-level projects using 
current digital photo and computer equipment. An adjustable 
digital camera is required for this course. This course 
specifically supports students pursuing digital production, 
web design, and journalism and mass communication. Skills 
will be developed in taking photographs and also building 
a portfolio. A student-provided adjustable digital camera 
is required. Some knowledge of Photoshop is helpful. Fall 
MCOM 2413 uses Mac, and Spring MULT 2413 uses PC 
(Windows). Lab fee: $10. Crosslisted with MCOM 2413. [Fa,Sp]
MULT 2503  Media Production (3-0-3)
Basic techniques for the planning, shooting and editing 
of audio, video and online media. Coursework features 
field camera operation, audio and video recording, basic 
lighting techniques, and computer editing of audio and video 
media, as well as following a basic script. Course includes a 
laboratory component. Lab fee: $10. Crosslisted with MCOM 
2503 and FSDM 2503.
Multimedia (MULT), continued
MUS 1001  Chorus (0-3-1) 
Rose State Chorus is a choral ensemble that is open to 
enrollment of both music majors and non-majors.  The 
repertoire of the ensemble will expose singers to a variety 
of styles of choral singing, traditional and non-traditional, 
Western and Non-Western, accompanied and a cappella.  
The chorus will participate in at least one public performance 
during the semester, the program to vary from semester to 
semester.
MUS 1201  Jazz Band (0-2-1) 
Performance of music arrangements. Permission of professor 
required.
MUS 1203  Music in Life (3-0-3) 
A nontechnical course which develops the student's 
appreciation of a wide variety of musical types and styles 
and his or her ability to listen critically to a musical selection. 
May be taken as Humanities credit for General Education 
requirements.
Music (MUS)
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
366

MUS 1212  Aural Theory I (2-0-2)
An aural study of the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic 
patterns found in the traditional music of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. These areas of concern will be studied both 
in isolated situations and within the framework of music 
literature. This course includes the development of skills 
in the areas of melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic dictation 
as well as the ability to vocally sight-read traditional music. 
Prerequisites: MUS 1263 or permission of professor and 
concurrent enrollment in MUS 1222 is required. This class is 
only offered in the fall semester.
MUS 1222  Harmony I (2-0-2) 
A study of melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic materials 
of music as used by composers of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. This course includes the study of scales, key 
signatures, meter signatures, intervals, chord construction, 
analysis of melodic and harmonic structures and part-
writing procedures. Concurrent enrollment in MUS 1212 
is required. Prerequisite: MUS 1263 or permission of 
professor. This class is only offered in the fall semester. 
MUS 1232  Aural Theory II (2-0-2) 
An aural study of the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic patterns 
found in the traditional music of the 17th and 18th centuries. 
These areas of concern will be studied both in isolated 
situations and within the framework of music literature. This 
course includes the development of skills in the areas of 
melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic dictation as well as the 
ability to vocally sight-read traditional music patterns. This 
is a continuation of MUS 1212, Aural Theory I. Prerequisites: 
MUS 1212, MUS 1222 and concurrent enrollment in MUS 
1242. This class is only offered in the spring semester. 
MUS 1242  Harmony II (2-0-2) 
A continuation of the study of melodic, harmonic, and 
rhythmic materials as used by composers of the 17th and 18th 
centuries which was begun in Harmony I. This course of study 
includes work in analysis, part-writing and harmonization with 
diatonic triads and seventh chords and their inversions. 
It also includes non-harmonic tones, cadences, and small 
forms. Prerequisites: MUS 1212, MUS 1222, and concurrent 
enrollment in MUS 1232. This class is only offered in the 
spring semester.
 
MUS 1263  Fundamentals of Music (3-0-3)
This introductory course includes the study of melodic, 
harmonic, and rhythmic elements of music. The focus will 
be on the recognition and dictation of these elements. 
These areas will be studied both in isolated situations 
and within the framework of musical composition. 
This class is only offered in the fall interim session. 
MUS 1301  Instrumental Ensemble (0-3-1) 
In this course, students will rehearse and perform a variety of 
instrumental music arrangements. Specific ensemble topics 
may vary. This class may be repeated as many times as the 
students enroll.
MUS 1313  Music Literature I (3-0-3) 
This course is a general survey of the music literature from 
the Medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque music style eras 
of the Western European musical canon. Class activities will 
include listening to recordings of compositions, discussion of 
music style characteristics of each era, discussion of a work's 
genre and examination of its musical form and other defining 
characteristics, and giving a brief biographical background 
of major composers. This class is only offered in the fall 
semester.
MUS 1323  Music Literature II (3-0-3) 
This course is a general survey of music literature from 
the Classical, Romantic, and Modern music style eras of 
the Western European musical canon.  Class activities 
will include listening to recordings of compositions, the 
discussion of music style characteristics of each era, 
the discussion of a work's genre and examination of its 
musical form and other defining characteristics, and giving 
a brief biographical background of major composers. 
This class is only offered in the spring semester.
MUS 1402  Group Piano I (2-0-2)
Group instruction in the fundamentals of playing the piano. 
Each student practices individually, using earphones at 
an electronic piano. Emphasis is placed on individualized 
instruction permitting each student to advance at his/her 
own pace.
MUS 1412  Beginning Group Guitar (2-0-2) 
Group instruction in fundamentals of guitar. Fundamentals of 
theory such as reading music are included. May be repeated 
as many times as the student enrolls.
MUS 1501  Orchestra (0-2-1) 
In this course, students will rehearse and perform a variety 
of orchestral music arrangements.  Specific ensemble topics 
may vary.  This class may be repeated as many times as 
the student enrolls.  Prerequisite:  Experience reading and 
playing an orchestral instrument.
MUS 1742  Musical Theatre Performance I (1-2-2)
Musical Theatre Performance I is the beginning foundational 
fundamentals of musical theatre course, exploring and 
understanding all aspects of the craft: singing, dancing and 
acting. Emphasis includes interview, audition techniques and 
theatre song study methods. Concurrent enrollment in MUS 
2512 required. Crosslisted with TH 1742.
MUS 1752  Musical Theatre Performance II (1-2-2)
Musical Theatre Performance II continues foundational 
fundamentals of musical theatre, exploring and understanding 
all aspects of the craft: singing, dancing and acting. Emphasis 
includes interview and audition techniques and theatre song 
study methods. Crosslisted with TH 1752. Prerequisite: MUS 
1742. 
MUS 2091-3  Special Topics in Music (Variable)
Directed individual or class study of special topics in music. 
May be repeated with different topics. For fee, see “Fees, 
Books, and Refunds.” Permission of professor required. 
MUS 2101  Rose Chamber Singers (0-3-1) 
A course designed for experienced singers; performance 
of unaccompanied choral literature for chamber choral 
ensembles and popular contemporary music, potentially 
with movement and choreography. Activities outside of 
Music (MUS), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
367

weekly rehearsals will include both on- and off-campus 
performances and/or appearances. Permission of professor 
will be required for this course.
MUS 2402  Aural Theory III (2-0-2) 
An aural study of the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic 
patterns found in the traditional music of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. These areas of concern will be studied both 
in isolated situations and within the framework of music 
literature. This course includes the development of skills in 
the areas of melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic dictation as well 
as the ability to vocally sight-read traditional music patterns. 
A continuation of Aural Theory II. Prerequisites: MUS 1232, 
MUS 1242, and concurrent enrollment in MUS 2422. This 
class is only offered in the fall semester.
MUS 2423  Native American Music (3-0-3) 
The course will survey Native American music of the North 
American continent, including The United States and Canada 
(with alternating emphases on music of the tribes of the 
Plains, Southwest, Eastern Woodlands, California, Great Basin 
and Plateau, Northwest Coast, and First Nations).  Instrument 
building, analytical essays of live performances, and a high 
level of aural classroom experience will be included.
MUS 2422  Harmony III (2-0-2) 
An advanced study of the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic 
materials of music as used by composers of the 17th through 
19th centuries. This course of study includes the study of 
modulation, secondary dominants and secondary leading 
tone chords. It also includes larger forms such as binary, 
ternary, rondo and sonata. Prerequisites: MUS 1232, MUS 
1242, and concurrent enrollment in MUS 2402. This class is 
only offered in the fall semester.
MUS 2432  Aural Theory IV (2-0-2) 
An aural study of the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic 
patterns found in the traditional music of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. These areas of concern will be studied both 
in isolated situations and within the framework of music 
literature. This course includes the development of skills in 
the areas of melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic dictation as well 
as the ability to vocally sight-read traditional music patterns. 
A continuation of Aural Theory III. Prerequisites: MUS 2402, 
MUS 2422, and concurrent enrollment in MUS 2442. This 
class is only offered in the spring semester.
MUS 2442  Harmony IV (2-0-2) 
An advanced study of the melodic, harmonic and rhythmic 
materials of music as used by composers of the 17th 
through 19th centuries. This course of study includes study 
of augmented sixth chords, Neopolitan sixth and altered 
dominant chords, enharmonic modulation and an introduction 
to 20th century harmonic practices. This exit/assessment 
course is the capstone course for music majors. Prerequisites: 
MUS 2402, MUS 2422, and concurrent enrollment in MUS 
2432. This class is only offered in the spring semester.
MUS 2501-2  Piano (Variable)
In this course students receive private instruction in piano 
technique and repertoire. Lesson times are arranged with the 
professor. There is an additional fee for this class. See “Fees, 
Books, and Refunds” in this Catalog. Permission of professor 
required.
MUS 2511-2  Voice (Variable) 
In this course, students receive private instruction 
in 
vocal 
technique 
and 
repertoire. 
Lesson 
times 
are arranged with the professor. This course also 
includes a 1-hour collaborative voice studio class. 
 
MUS 2521-2  Guitar (Variable)
In this course, students receive private instruction in guitar 
technique and repertoire. Lesson times are arranged with the 
professor. There is an additional fee for this class. See “Fees, 
Books, and Refunds” in this Catalog. Permission of professor 
required.
MUS 2541-2  Woodwind Instruments (Variable) 
In this course, students receive private instruction in 
woodwind instrument technique and repertoire. Lesson times 
are arranged with the professor. There is an additional fee for 
this class. See “Fees, Books, and Refunds” in this Catalog. 
Permission of professor required.
MUS 2551-2  Brass Instruments (Variable) 
In this course, students receive private instruction in brass 
instrument technique and repertoire. Lesson times are 
arranged with the professor. There is an additional fee for 
this class. See “Fees, Books, and Refunds” in this Catalog.  
Permission of professor required.
 
MUS 2561-2  Percussion Instruments (Variable)
In this course, students receive private instruction in 
percussion instrument technique and repertoire. Lesson 
times are arranged with the professor. There is an additional 
fee for this class. See “Fees, Books, and Refunds” in this 
Catalog. Permission of professor required.
 
MUS 2571-2  Stringed Instruments (Variable)
In this course, students receive private instruction in stringed 
instrument technique and repertoire. Lesson times are 
arranged with the professor. There is an additional fee for 
this class. See “Fees, Books, and Refunds” in this Catalog. 
Permission of professor required.
Music (MUS), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
368

Native American Studies (NAS)
NAS 1113  Introduction to Native American Studies (3-0-3)
This course will introduce students to key concepts and 
methods in the study about and education of the indigenous 
peoples of America. Areas of survey include: Native American 
history; processes of colonization and de-colonization; Native 
cultures (past and present); Indian education; health; Native 
American philosophies (religious and political); arts and 
humanities; identity (individual and tribal); tribal sovereignty; 
federal Indian policies and law; systems of tribal governance; 
tribal economic development; and, other components of the 
Native American experience. May be taken as Humanities 
credit for General Education requirements. This course is only 
offered in the fall semester.
NAS 2223  Native American Philosophy (3-0-3)
This course introduces students to various philosophies, 
world views, spiritual ways of Native American people, past 
and present, traditional and academic. Students will examine 
works by Native American authors in order to frame learning 
and discussions around how Native Americans understand 
questions of reality, knowledge, and ethics and how Native 
understanding and logic is far different than that of the 
western world. Three general areas of Native American 
philosophy will be explored: first, the general themes found in 
Native American philosophies; second, examination of a few 
traditional tribal world views; third, a look at contemporary 
Native American thought and philosophy. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113. This course is only offered in the fall semester.
NAS 2803  American Indian Law, Policy, Sovereignty (3-0-3)
This course is an introduction to American Indian federal law 
and policy and tribal sovereignty that explores the legal (and 
historical) relationship between Indian nations and people 
with the U.S., and the implications of this relationship for 
states and citizens. The first half of the course examines the 
historical development of American Indian law and policy 
which, by extension, is the history of Indian tribal sovereignty. 
The second portion of the semester explores specific and 
contemporary issues of sovereignty. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. 
This course is only offered in the spring semester.
Orientation (ORI)
ORI 1101  College Orientation (1-0-1)
Designed to provide a structured and holistic introduction to 
the collegiate environment. This course will introduce new 
students to academic programs, educational opportunities 
and responsibilities, campus services and resources, and 
highlight academic strategies that may facilitate successful 
transition to Rose State College.
Philosophy (PHIL)
PHIL 1103  Introduction to Philosophy (3-0-3) 
This course investigates issues in philosophy such as free 
will, personal identity, the relation between knowledge, 
evidence, and belief, the nature of right and wrong, and 
the nature of justice or political authority. Major emphasis 
is placed on Western philosophy, but other traditions are 
considered. This course may be taken as Humanities credit 
for General Education requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 
or concurrent enrollment. 
PHIL 1223  Introduction to Asian Philosophy (3-0-3)
This course will introduce students to the foundational texts 
of the major philosophic schools from India and China, 
with emphasis on Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and 
Daoism. We will examine the primary philosophic questions 
addressed by each tradition, and where appropriate seek to 
make connections to parallels in Western thought. Overall, 
the goal of this course is to introduce how these different 
traditions offer valuable contributions to general philosophical 
questions. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or concurrent enrollment. 
This class is only offered in the spring semester.
PHIL 2091-3  Special Topics in Philosophy (Variable) 
Directed individual or class study of special topics in 
philosophy. Permission of professor required.
PHIL 2103  Social & Political Philosophy (3-0-3) 
The study of classic and contemporary ideas and ideologies 
that shape the current debates in politics, help define the 
major issues in the modern world, and provide the basis for 
interpreting and analyzing current policy issues and political 
events. Crosslisted with POLS 2803. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 
or concurrent enrollment. This class is only offered in the fall 
semester.
PHIL 2113  Introduction to Logic & Critical Thinking (3-0-3) 
This is a training course in critical reasoning skills and 
formal logic. The first half of the course is devoted to a 
general introduction to critical reasoning, obstacles to critical 
reasoning studied by cognitive psychologists, and inductive 
argumentation, especially determining probabilities. The 
second half of the course is devoted to the use of formal logic 
in the evaluation of statements and arguments. All topics 
in the course are geared especially toward the practical 
applicability of critical reasoning skills. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113 or concurrent enrollment.
 
PHIL 2203  Philosophy of Religion (3-0-3) 
The focus of this course is the application of philosophy 
to religious world views. Topics covered may include the 
following: arguments for the existence of God, the problem 
of evil, the rationality of religious belief, religious experience, 
atheism, religious exclusivism versus pluralism, paradoxical 
attributes of God, non-traditional/non-Western conceptions 
of God and religion. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or concurrent 
enrollment. This class is only offered in the spring semester.
PHIL 2303  Introduction to Ethics (3-0-3)
This course focuses on many of the major ethical systems 
and issues in the history of philosophy. Special emphasis 
is given to Western or traditional ethical systems, though 
some non-traditional ethical systems are also considered. 
The course also includes the application of these systems to 
specific moral issues and moral dilemmas. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113 or concurrent enrollment. 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
369

Philosophy (PHIL), continued
PHIL 2401-3  Internship in Philosophy (Variable)
This course enables students to gain legitimate work 
experience in an academic setting. Responsibilities will include 
but are not limited to research, marketing, organizational 
projects, clerical work, presentations, and report writing. 
This course provides a valuable opportunity especially to 
students who aim to acquire advanced professional degrees 
or join the work force upon completion of their baccalaureate 
degrees.  Prerequisite:  Completion of 6 hours of philosophy 
and permission of professor required.
PHIL 2503  Philosophy Capstone (3-0-3)
Philosophy Capstone evaluates the philosophical prowess of 
students seeking an associate's degree in philosophy.  Capstone 
is especially designed to provide adequate preparation for 
studying philosophy at a four-year institution.  This course 
is required for students graduating with a Liberal Studies 
(Philosophy Emphasis) degree.  Prerequisite:  Completion 
of at least 9 hours in philosophy with a grade of C or better. 
 
PHIL 2603  The Ethics of Data Science (3-0-3)
Data and digital technology permeate a wide range of 
life including areas like media, medicine, law, insurance, 
commerce, banking, politics, education, and advertising. This 
course provides the tools needed to recognize, analyze, 
and evaluate the ethical implications of this phenomenon. 
Through exposure to ethical frameworks and multiple case 
studies, students will develop the ethical discernment needed 
to analyze and cope with data and digital technology-related 
problems as small as everyday shopping decisions and as 
large as national elections. Topics covered in the course 
may include patient and consumer privacy, algorithmic bias, 
honesty in data reporting, misinformation and manipulation 
of information, pricing and credit lending policies, medical 
diagnoses, and artificial intelligence. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 
or concurrent enrollment
Physical Science (PHSC)
PHSC 1001  Earth Science Lab (0-2-1)
A study of the earth sciences that will include topics in 
geology, oceanography, meteorology and astronomy. This 
course is designed for those students who are not majoring 
in science and need a physical science lab. Prerequisite: 
PHSC 1003 or concurrent enrollment.
PHSC 1003  Earth Science (3-0-3)
This is a non-science major's course that will give the student 
an overview of the physical environment with balanced, up-to-
date coverage of the earth sciences (geology, oceanography, 
astronomy and meteorology). It is intended for the student 
with little background in science. Prerequisite: MATH 0124 or 
equivalent.
PHSC 1114  Physical Geography (3-2-4) 
This course offers a systematic introduction to the physical 
earth; including earth materials, landform processes, and 
resultant landforms. Topics of analysis include maps and 
globes, earth/sun relationships, climate and weather; and the 
shaping of landforms.  Human interactions and impacts on the 
local, regional, and global environment are also discussed. 
During the lab, students complete exercises requiring "hands 
on" use of geographical tools of interpretation.  This course 
is cross-listed with GEOG 1114. Lab fee $10.00.  Prerequisite: 
MATH 0124, Foundations of Math or equivalent
PHSC 1313  General Physical Science (3-0-3) 
Principles, techniques, and facts from the fields of astronomy, 
chemistry, geology, and physics will be explored as they 
relate to the scientific method and to living in the complex 
world today. This is a general education course for non-
science majors. Prerequisite: MATH 0144 or equivalent.
PHSC 2091-5  Special Topics in Physical Science (Variable) 
Directed individual study of special topics and special courses 
in physical science. Course credit may be applied toward 
meeting the physical science requirement of associate 
degree programs.
PHYS 1253  Introductory Musical Acoustics & Sound (3-0-3)
Introduction to basic concepts in the science of vibration, 
waves, and sound. Topics may include the production of sound 
by selected musical instruments and electronic components, 
the voice, psychological and physiological aspects of sound 
perception, and room acoustics. Topics explored through 
lectures, physical and multimedia demonstrations, interactive 
discussions and activities. This course is designed for 
students with little or no background in physics. Prerequisite: 
MATH 0144 or equivalent.
PHYS 1513  Introductory Physics (3-0-3) 
Introduction to basic physics concepts and selected 
applications. Topics may include mechanics, heat, wave, 
sound, electricity, magnetism, light and optics. The course is 
designed for students with little or no background in physics. 
This course will also fulfill the 3 credit-hour physical science 
requirement. Prerequisite: MATH 0144 or equivalent.
PHYS 2091-6  Special Topics in Physics (Variable) 
A study of special topics and special interest courses in 
physics. These courses offer special instruction in selected 
topics in physics with associated experimental work. May 
consist of specialized physics courses offered to technical 
personnel of area companies, agencies, or other select 
groups in the community. Lecture and lab hours variable. This 
course cannot be applied to General Education Requirements.
PHYS 2401  General Physics Laboratory I (0-3-1) 
A general physics lab containing experiments utilizing 
computer graphing and measuring techniques within selected 
topics from mechanics, heat, waves, and sound. Lab fee: 
$15. Prerequisite: PHYS 2414 or PHYS 2434 or concurrent 
enrollment.
Physics (PHYS)
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
370

Physics (PHYS), continued
PHYS 2411  General Physics Laboratory II (0-3-1) 
A general physics lab containing experiments utilizing 
computer graphing and measuring techniques within 
selected topics from electricity, magnetism, light, optics, and 
modern physics. Lab fee: $15. Prerequisite: PHYS 2424 or 
PHYS 2444 or concurrent enrollment.
PHYS 2414  General Physics I (4-0-4) 
Introduction to basic theories and applications from selected 
topics within mechanics, heat, waves, and sound. This 
course may be for students entering fields other than 
physics, engineering, or chemistry. Particularly designed to 
fulfill the needs of the students in such fields as pre-med, 
pharmacy, and secondary education. Prerequisite: MATH 
1513 or equivalent.
PHYS 2424  General Physics II (4-0-4) 
Introduction to basic theories and applications from selected 
topics within electricity, magnetism, light, optics, and modern 
physics (optional). Continuation of PHYS 2414. Prerequisite: 
PHYS 2414 or equivalent.
 
PHYS 2434  Physics I for Engineering & Science Majors 
(4-0-4) 
Fundamental theories and applications from selected topics 
within mechanics, heat, waves, and sound. This course 
services physics, engineering, chemistry, other sciences, 
and technical fields requiring a calculus-based first semester 
physics course. Prerequisite: MATH 1914 or equivalent.
PHYS 2444  Physics II for Engineering & Science Majors 
(4-0-4) 
Fundamental theories and applications from selected 
topics with electricity, magnetism, light, optics, special 
relativity and modern physics. This course services physics, 
engineering, chemistry, other sciences, and technical fields 
requiring a calculus-based second semester physics course. 
Continuation of PHYS 2434. Prerequisites: PHYS 2434, 
MATH 1914, or permission of professor.
PHYS 2502  Advanced Physics Laboratory (0-4-2)
Extended study of various topics in physics with emphasis on 
the associated experimental work. Includes special instruction 
with independent study responsibilities. Experiments will 
utilize computer support when appropriate. Lab fee: $15. 
Prerequisite: PHYS 2401 or PHYS 2411.
 
PHYS 2943  Modern Physics for Engineers (3-0-3)
Introduction to the fundamental concepts, mathematical 
methods, and selected applications utilized within major 
topics of modern physics. These topics include special 
relativity, wave properties of particles, quantum mechanics 
(Schrodinger Equation), the physics of atoms, molecules, 
and nuclei. Additional topics within solid state and statistical 
physics may be included as time permits. Topics explored 
through lectures, physical and multimedia demonstrations, 
interactive discussions, and possible project/lab related 
activities. Prerequisites: PHYS 2444 and MATH 2973, or 
permission of professor.
Political Science (POLS)
POLS 1113  American Federal Government (3-0-3)
A study of the principles, structure, processes, and 
functions of the United States Federal Government. 
Includes 
political 
parties 
and 
interest 
groups, 
political theory, civil rights, and political behavior. 
POLS 1123  Introduction to Law Enforcement (3-0-3) 
A course designed to acquaint the student with the goals, 
functions, historical background, and operation of the field of 
Law Enforcement and to satisfy part of the requirements for 
the Collegiate Officer Program. Career opportunities in Law 
Enforcement will be explored. This course is required for all 
Collegiate Officer Program students. Crosslisted with CJ 1123.
 
POLS 2091-3  Special Topics in Political Science (Variable) 
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in Political 
Science. Topics to be determined by the program needs of 
student. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credit hours. 
 
POLS 2103  Introduction to Political Science (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of the history, literature, methods 
and areas of concentration within the academic discipline 
of Political Science. It will include introductions to both 
normative and empirical aspects of that discipline. This 
course is only offered in the spring semester (odd years).
 
POLS 2191-3  Political Science Internship (Variable)
This course provides the opportunity for on-the-job training to 
students enrolled in the Political Science program. Students 
will be placed for a given number of work hours to intern 
with professionals in a governmental office. Prerequisite: 
sophomore standing; permission of professor required.
POLS 2203  Introduction to Public Policy (3-0-3) 
Explores government actions to address social problems 
such as crime, poverty, health care, education, welfare 
reform, and the environment. Focuses on how to craft policy 
responses to conflict situations; resolve competing political 
demands for more services yet lower taxes; and achieve 
important societal goals of efficiency, equity, fairness, and 
freedom. This course is only offered in the spring semester.
POLS 2213  Introduction to Campaigns & Elections (3-0-3)
This class is designed to prepare students for participation 
and theory of political campaigns of the United States political 
system. The course is an overview of major campaign topics 
(e.g., strategy, message and planning, support operations, 
campaign technology, political culture and public opinion, 
targeting, budgeting and fund-raising, candidate activity, 
contacting voters individually and in groups, mail and 
cyberspace campaigning in the mass media, GOTV [getting-
out-the-vote], etc.). 
POLS 2303  Introduction to Mass Media & Politics (3-0-3)
Introduction to Mass Media & Politics is a survey of the 
international and American media system, including the 
digital media and internet, and the role of the media in 
modern politics. The course will cover the traditional media 
(print and broadcast) and emphasize the importance of 
the new (or digital) media in delivering political news and 
information; in fostering participation among citizens to 
sociopolitical events; and how political information impacts 
our decisions as political actors. This course is only offered 
in the fall semester.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
371

Political Science (POLS), continued
POLS 2383  Power, Mobilization, and Revolution (3-0-3) 
This course examines the roles that power structures, forces 
of mobilization, and revolutionary dynamics have played 
in the development of mass political movements across 
time and space. Topics will include revolutionary uprisings, 
radical political philosophies, civil rights issues, and the 
maturation of sociopolitical interest groups. The curriculum 
will encourage students to think critically and creatively 
about political institutions in order to understand what 
motivated revolutionary behavior; to explore how political 
reform movements lived and died in relation to the political 
systems in which they operated; and evaluate complex social 
and political phenomena and their changes over time. Cross-
listed with POLS 2383. 
POLS 2403  Introduction to Comparative Political Systems 
(3-0-3) 
A survey of the theories of democracy, communism, fascism, 
socialism, and capitalism in relationship to nationalism and 
international politics. The student will utilize basic theories 
and methods of comparative analysis in studying selected 
nation-states.  Relevant international political issues and 
events will also be examined.  Topics for analysis will include 
political development/governance, culture, elites, parties 
and political change (including social movement theory.) 
This course is only offered in the spring semester.  Prerequisite: 
POLS 1113
POLS 2503  Introduction to International Relations (3-0-3) 
This course is a study of the principles, structures, processes, 
and functions of governments and politics around the world.  
The course explores the nature of the political ideology, 
government structures, and pressing issues.  Analysis and 
discourse will include how the different regions and levels of 
government interact with one another and the role citizens 
play in the governmental process.  Students should have a 
firm grasp of current political issues that are occurring in the 
nation as well as around the world. This course is only offered 
in the fall semester.  Prerequisite: POLS 1113
POLS 2603  Introduction to Public Administration (3-0-3) 
Introductory course in Public Administration. The course is 
involved with administration, administrative organization, 
decision-making 
processes, 
human 
relations, 
and 
responsibilities of administrators in the public sector. This 
course is only offered in the fall semester.
POLS 2703  Introduction to State & Local Government 
(3-0-3) 
A study of the constitutional provisions, organization, 
political processes, and problems facing state and municipal 
governments. This course is only offered in the spring 
semester.
POLS 2803  Introduction to Political Theory (3-0-3) 
The study of classic and contemporary ideas and ideologies 
that shape the current debates in politics, help define the 
major issues in the modern world, and provide the basis for 
interpreting and analyzing current policy issues and political 
events. Crosslisted with PHIL 2103.  This course is only 
offered in the fall semester.
Potawatomi (POTA)
POTA 1115  Elementary Potawatomi Language I (5-0-5)
Through a partnership between the Citizen Potawatomi 
Nation Language Department and the college, this language 
course will introduce students to the culture, history, 
phonology, morphology, syntax, conversational practice, and 
vocabulary of Bodewadmimwen (Potawatomi Language). 
Framed in a seasonal context, four modules guide students 
through a Potawatomi-centered worldview to create story-
listeners and - tellers. By the end of the course, students 
will appreciate the central significance of Bodewadmimwen 
and join the revitalization effort by writing their own original 
children's book. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or concurrent 
enrollment
Psychology (PSYC)
PSYC 1103  Psychology of Human Relationships (3-0-3)
This course considers the formation, development and 
maintenance of interpersonal relationships of all kinds. 
Emphasis is placed on understanding relationship 
dynamics, interpersonal communications, and interpersonal 
problem-solving strategies. Topics covered may include: 
active listening skills, developing intimate relationships, 
effective interpersonal boundary management, non-verbal 
communication and conflict resolution.
PSYC 1113  Introduction to Psychology (3-0-3) 
This course is a comprehensive survey of the major 
academic subdivisions within the science of psychology. 
Topics covered may include: the biology of behavior and 
perception, states of consciousness, intelligence, motivation, 
personality, psychosocial development, adjustment to stress, 
psychological disorders, and methods of treatment for 
psychological disorders.
PSYC 1223  Careers & Writing in Psychology (3-0-3)
This course familiarizes students with the diversity of 
psychology as a science and as a profession. Through 
an exploration of career options in psychology, students 
design degree plans and curriculum vitae in preparation 
for academic and professional advancement. The course 
also focuses on the development of students’ skills in 
producing and evaluating psychological writing, as well as 
considering the impact of bias and subjectivity in producing 
and evaluating psychological writing.
PSYC 2091-3  Special Topics in Psychology (Variable) 
This course is directed, individual study or a class for 
particular topics within the field of psychology. Topics will 
be determined by the program needs of the student(s). This 
course may be repeated for a maximum of 3 credit hours. 
Depending upon the content of the course, PSYC 1113 may or 
may not be a prerequisite. Permission of Dean of the Social 
Sciences Division required.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
372

PSYC 2123  Sex & Gender (3-0-3)
This course is a study of sex and gender formation and 
expression. It includes a focus on sex and gender role 
stereotypes and how they affect the lives of both men 
and women. Also covered are socialization into sex and 
gender roles, a comparison of occupational distributions 
and earnings of men and women, and an analysis of the 
social movements which work for a change in stereotyped 
sex roles. Crosslisted with SOC 2123. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113 and PSYC 1113.
 
PSYC 2213  Developmental Psychology (3-0-3) 
This course considers the theories, current research, and 
practical applications regarding the social, emotional and 
cognitive development of humans across the life span.  
Specific topics covered may include:  prenatal development, 
social attachment, navigating adolescent identity issues, 
existential issues in old age, language development, and 
moral development.  Prerequisite:  PSYC 1113 and ENGL 1113.
PSYC 2303  Personality Theories (3-0-3) 
This course examines the major theories and theorists 
concerned 
with 
the 
development, 
structure, 
and 
measurement of personality: the organization of one’s 
cognition, emotions, and behaviors. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113 
and ENGL 1113.
 
PSYC 2313  Introduction to Counseling (3-0-3)
This course considers the major principles, goals, and 
styles of counseling as these developed from theories 
of personality development and psychological research. 
Psychodynamic, Client-Centered, Behavioral, Gestalt, and 
eclectic approaches may be examined. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1113 and PSYC 1113 OR PSYC 1103.
PSYC 2323  Social Psychology (3-0-3) 
This course examines the theory and research concerning 
the role of the individual in society and the effects of social 
interactions on individual behavior. Topics covered may 
include: social cognition, social perception, social learning, 
attitudes and attitude change, conformity, prosocial behavior 
and aggression, and social influence. Prerequisite: PSYC 
1113 and ENGL 1113.
PSYC 2391-3  Psychology Internship (Variable)
This course will allow students, through internships, the 
opportunity to observe and experience a variety of activities 
directly related to the operation of psychology in a variety of 
clinical and service settings.
 
PSYC 2403  Child Psychology (3-0-3) 
This course provides an in-depth study of the psychological 
unfolding of children, from birth through adolescence, 
within the social and cultural expectations of the various 
components of society. Topics considered may include: 
physical 
development, 
moral 
development, 
peer 
relationships, aggression, emotional development, and 
cognitive development. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113.
PSYC 2413  Psychology of Human Sexuality (3-0-3) 
This course examines the nature and role of sexuality 
within and among humans. Emphasis is placed on the 
development of healthy interpersonal relationships and 
contemporary issues in sexuality. Topics covered may 
include: male and female sexual anatomy and physiology, 
attraction and love-binding forces, relationship dynamics, 
sexual orientation, sexual dysfunctions and their treatment, 
and sexually transmitted infections. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113 
and ENGL 1113.
PSYC 2433  Observing & Assessing Human Behavior 
(2-1-3)
This course explores various methods used to document 
and evaluate the development of young children (infants 
through 8 years old) in structured and unstructured situations. 
PSYC 2433 will highlight the value of keen observation in 
order to record and assess the social, physical, language, 
intellectual, creative and emotional development in young 
children. Ethics, confidentiality, teacher accountability, family 
communication, portfolio organization, developmental 
milestones, the process of identifying individual strengths 
and challenges are some of the topics that will be addressed. 
Supervised field observation experiences are mandatory. 
Before beginning professor-approved supervised field 
observation experiences, students must complete and pass 
an OSBI Background Check and drug screening test. These 
2 requirements will be at cost to the student. Crosslisted 
with FSCD 2433. Permission of professor required. 
PSYC 2503  Psychology Statistics (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to familiarize the student with the 
application of statistical methods to research in psychology. 
Topics covered may include: experimental design, measures 
of central tendency and variability, z-scores, normal 
distribution, correlation, regression, sampling distributions, 
hypothesis testing, t-tests, and squared tests. Prerequisites: 
PSYC 1113 and MATH 0124 or equivalent.
PSYC 2523  Child Growth & Development (3-0-3) 
This course considers the growth and development of the 
child from conception through adolescence. Topics covered 
may include the responsibilities of parenthood, physical 
growth, intellectual growth, personality development, social 
and family adjustment, and communication. Crosslisted with 
FSCD 2523.
PSYC 2703  Psychology of Abnormal Behavior (3-0-3) 
This course focuses on the systematic description, 
diagnosis, and origins of psychological disorders. Case 
studies and films will be used to depict particular disorders 
contained in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders. Topics covered may include: common myths and 
misconceptions regarding abnormal behavior, assessment, 
schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, 
childhood disorders, and mood disorders. Prerequisite: 
PSYC 1113 and ENGL 1113.
Psychology (PSYC), continued
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
373

Sociology (SOC)
Reading (READ)
NOTE: Rose State College is committed to the academic 
success of its students. Appropriate placement is a vital 
element to each student’s success. A student’s placement 
scores (within 3 years) through high school GPA, ACT, SAT, 
or Next Generation ACCUPLACER adequately determine 
college-entry level. If this level is not cleared by the test, 
developmental courses may be required. 
READ 1203  Reading & Vocabulary Enrichment (3-0-3)
This course is designed to improve the student’s reading and 
vocabulary skills. Each student’s reading level is determined 
through diagnostic testing and an individualized program is 
planned for improvement through the use of the textbook 
and reading lab.
 
READ 1213  Advanced Reading & Vocabulary Enrichment 
(3-0-3)
This course is designed to improve students' reading 
comprehension, reading rate, vocabulary skills, and ability to 
read and comprehend content areas across the curriculum.  
Each student's reading, vocabulary, and reading rate level is 
determined through diagnostic testing, and an individualized 
program is planned for improvement through the use of the 
textbook and reading lab.  Prerequisite: Satisfactory reading 
assessment score or READ 1203.
READ 2091-3  Special Topics in Reading (Variable) 
Class study designed to address special topics in reading. 
May be repeated with different topics. Prerequisites will vary 
with topics.
SOC 1113  Introduction to Sociology (3-0-3) 
This course will examine fundamental sociological concepts 
and how they relate to everyday lives. It is designed to 
provide a critical approach to understanding society, including 
collective behavior, community life, social institutions, and 
social change. Students will also discuss and examine how 
the sociological perspective can help us understand various 
positions on current issues. While principles and concepts 
of social science and its methodologies are introduced, 
emphasis is placed on the critical discussions of social 
issues resulting from cultural differences and diversity, social 
discrimination, social mobility, gender bias, and economic 
inequalities. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.
SOC 2091-3  Special Topics in Sociology (Variable) 
Directed individual study or class in specific topics in 
Sociology. Topics to be determined by the program needs of 
students. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credit hours. 
Permission of Division Dean required.
SOC 2113  Introduction to Social Work (3-0-3)
An introduction to the profession of social work, its purposes, 
professional values, scope and methods. Students will review 
the history and development of the American Social Welfare 
system and social services policy in the United States. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.
SOC 2123  Sex & Gender (3-0-3)
This course is a study of sex and gender formation and 
expression. It includes a focus on sex and gender role 
stereotypes and how they affect the lives of both men 
and women. Also covered are socialization into sex and 
gender roles, a comparison of occupational distributions and 
earnings of men and women, and an analysis of the social 
movements which work for a change in stereotyped sex 
roles. Crosslisted with PSYC 2123. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 
and SOC 1113.
SOC 2223  Social Problems (3-0-3) 
This course examines major social problems in American 
society, such as substance abuse, crime, mental and physical 
illness, poverty, and inequality. Each social problem is 
analyzed through the contexts of history, globalism, theory, 
research, and social policy to understand its causes and 
consequences. Possibilities for effective prevention and 
solutions for social problems are also explored. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1113.
SOC 2333  Families & Substance Abuse (3-0-3)
Families and Substance Abuse is a course in which the 
student examines the family as a social institution and the 
influences that substance abuse has on the institution. Major 
emphasis is placed on theoretical models of substance 
abuse, social and historical context of substance abuse, 
legal aspects of drug abuse, and issues that typically exist in 
families dealing with substance abuse. Crosslisted with FSCD 
2333. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 and SOC 1113.
SOC 2403  The Family in Society (3-0-3)
This course will focus on the family as a social institution. 
It will provide a historical and multi-cultural overview of 
the family, as well as address the many issues facing and 
redefining the modern family. Throughout the duration of the 
course, students will examine the relationship between social 
inequality and the family with a particular focus on gender 
inequality, the current parameters of family roles, and the 
impact of social class, race, and ethnicity. Crosslisted with 
FSCD 2403. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 and SOC 1113.
SOC 2463  Understanding Child Abuse & Neglect (3-0-3)
The purpose of this course is to provide a general introduction 
to the topic of child welfare, including abuse and neglect. The 
student will be given information about how children have 
been viewed throughout history and within various cultural 
contexts. The student will learn about the various methods 
of child welfare, intervention and prevention strategies, and 
how the social services systems response to child abuse 
and neglect has evolved. Crosslisted with FSCD 2463. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113.
SOC 2503  Criminology (3-0-3)
A study of the nature and causes of various forms of illegal 
activity. Emphasis is given to the role of social factors in the 
genesis of deviant motivation and to the question of how 
this motivation comes to be expressed as criminal activity. 
Crosslisted with CJ 2503. Prerequisites: ENGL 1113 and SOC 
1113.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
374

Spanish (SPAN)
Social Sciences Special Topics (SOSC)
SOSC 2091-4  Special Topics in the Social Sciences 
(Variable) 
Selected topic(s) in one of the subject areas offered in the 
Social Sciences. Topics to be determined by program needs 
of students. Permission of professor and Division Dean 
required.
SOSC 2191-4  Social Science Internship (Variable) 
This is a lab course designed to provide Social Sciences 
majors with work experience which is directly related to their 
major program. Permission of Division Dean required.
SPAN 1003 Basic Spanish Conversation (3-0-3)
This is the first introductory Spanish conversation course. 
It is an introduction to the target language with a focus 
on listening and speaking, providing intensive practice 
in the language on topics of everyday life.  The primary 
purpose of this course is to give students conversational 
patterns they can use in their daily life.  The secondary 
purpose is to give students more specific vocabulary and 
patterns for specific topics.  This class may be taken 
for Liberal Arts Elective or General Education Elective. 
SPAN 1115  Elementary Spanish I (5-0-5) 
This course is an introduction to the Spanish language. 
Through study of Spanish grammar, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation, this course emphasizes the development of 
speaking, writing, reading, and understanding the language 
at a novice level while developing an appreciation of life 
in Spain and Hispanic America. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 or 
concurrent enrollment.
SPAN 1225  Elementary Spanish II (5-0-5) 
This course is a continuation of Elementary Spanish I. Through 
study of Spanish grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation, 
this course emphasizes the continuing development of 
speaking, writing, reading, and understanding the language 
at a novice level while developing an appreciation of life in 
Spain and Hispanic America. Prerequisite: SPAN 1115. This 
class is only offered in the spring and summer semesters.
SPAN 1261  Spanish Immersion (1-0-1)
The Spanish Immersion course provides an intensive 
language-learning experience for the student who has some 
background in Spanish. Following an orientation meeting 
on campus, students spend a weekend at an off-campus 
location hearing and speaking only Spanish. In addition 
to some formal classes focusing on selected topics of 
vocabulary and grammar, students participate in a variety 
of activities enabling them to experience a total immersion. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 1115 or permission of professor.
SPAN 2091-3  Special Topics in Spanish (Variable) 
Directed individual or class study of special topics in Spanish. 
May be repeated with different topics. Permission of professor 
required.
SPAN 2113  Intermediate Spanish I (3-0-3) 
This course concentrates on the solidification and expansion 
of the Spanish skills learned at the elementary level. Emphasis 
is on using the language in varying situations through 
readings, conversations, and compositions. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 1225. This class is only offered in the fall semester.
SPAN 2223  Intermediate Spanish II (3-0-3) 
This course is a continuation of SPAN 2113. Through more 
advanced readings, conversations, and compositions, 
students will successfully achieve an intermediate level of 
ability to use the language in speaking, writing, reading, and 
understanding of the language. Prerequisite: SPAN 2113. This 
class is only offered in the spring semester.
Student Services (STSR)
STSR 0101-3  Special Topics in Student Services (Variable) 
This course is designed to be used for topics that involve 
classes for students who lack the necessary skills to be 
successful in college-level courses.
Theatre (TH)
TH 1103  Stagecraft (3-0-3) 
Principles of constructing, rigging, painting, and assembling 
modern stage scenery and equipment.  Requires 16 laboratory 
hours which include some evenings and weekends.  This 
course is offered every fall semester.  This course is cross-
listed with FSDM 1103.
TH 1311  Theatre Production I (0-3-1) 
Theatre Production I is a lab for the exploration, development, 
and synthesis of all the elements of theatre. Practical hands-
on experience through acting, directing, technical theatre 
work and theatre management are provided through the 
preparation and public performance of plays and musicals. 
Students participate in all phases of production including 
research, set construction, safety, acting, directing, design, 
and business management.
TH 1321  Theatre Production II (0-3-1) 
Theatre Production II is a continued lab for the exploration, 
development, and synthesis of all the elements of theatre. 
Practical hands-on experience through acting, directing, 
technical theatre work and theatre management are provided 
through the preparation and public performance of plays and 
musicals. Students participate in all phases of production 
including research, set construction, safety, acting, directing, 
design, and business management. Prerequisite: TH 1311.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
375

Theatre (TH), continued
TH 1341  Theatre Dance–Ballet Technique (0-3-1) 
Theatre Dance - Ballet Technique introduces students to the 
fundamentals of classical ballet technique.  In each class, 
students participate in conditioning, movement exercises and 
dance phrases designed to increase knowledge and improve 
execution of basic ballet steps.  This course is offered every 
fall semester.
TH 1351  Theatre Dance–Jazz & Tap (0-2-1)
Fundamentals of jazz and tap dance technique.  The course 
will cover terminology, basic steps, history and style.  Students 
will learn musical theatre dance combinations.  This course is 
offered every spring semester.
TH 1353  Introduction to Theatre (3-0-3) 
A survey and analysis of theatre history, literature and 
practices relating the relevance of the theatre as a social 
force. Theatre is examined from the perspectives of audience, 
playwright, director, actor, and designers. May also be taken 
for Humanities credit.
TH 1513  Acting I (3-0-3) 
Designed to acquaint the beginning actor with the 
fundamentals of acting, this course explores the physical, 
vocal, emotional, and technical aspects of the actor's craft.
TH 1533  Voice & Diction (3-0-3) 
Study of vocal mechanism, phonetics, International Phonetic 
Alphabet, and related exercises to improve student's voice, 
articulation, pronunciation and expressive intonation for 
effective oral communication. This class is offered in the fall 
semester.
 
TH 1742 Musical Theatre Performance I (1-2-2)
Musical Theatre Performance I is the beginning foundational 
fundamentals of musical theatre course, exploring and 
understanding all aspects of the craft: singing, dancing and 
acting. Emphasis includes interview, audition techniques and 
theatre song study methods. Concurrent enrollment in MUS 
2512 required. Crosslisted with MUS 1742.
TH 1752 Musical Theatre Performance II (1-2-2)
Musical Theatre Performance II continues foundational 
fundamentals of musical theatre, exploring and understanding 
all aspects of the craft: singing, dancing and acting. Emphasis 
includes interview, audition techniques, and theatre song 
study methods. Crosslisted with MUS 1752. Prerequisite: TH 
1742.
TH 2091 4  Special Topics in Theatre (Variable) 
Directed individual or class study of special topics in theatre 
may be repeated with different topics. Permission of professor 
required.
TH 2113  Make-Up (3-0-3) 
This course is designed to acquaint students with the 
purpose, principles, practices and materials of stage make-
up. This course covers straight, character, middle age and old 
age make-up, fantasy types, and the application of hair, latex 
and other make-up elements. This class is only offered in the 
spring semester every other academic year.
TH 2331  Theatre Production III (0-3-1) 
Theatre Production III is a continued lab for the exploration, 
development, and synthesis of all the elements of theatre. 
Practical hands-on experience through acting, directing, 
technical theatre work and theatre management are provided 
through the preparation and public performance of plays and 
musicals. Students participate in all phases of production 
including research, set construction, safety, acting, directing, 
design, and business management. Prerequisite: TH 1321.
TH 2523  Acting II (3-0-3) 
This course will develop the actor's craft through scene 
study and various techniques of character analysis and 
development. Prerequisite: TH 1513.
TH 2713  Directing (3-0-3) 
The use of theory and practical exercise will be applied 
to acquaint the student with techniques of play analysis, 
directing, and stage management. Prerequisites: TH 1513 and 
TH 1353. This class is offered in the spring semester.
TH 2721-3  Theatre Internship (Variable) 
The student will gain practical experience in a specific 
aspect of the theatre by working with a professional or semi-
professional company either as an actor or as part of the 
production team. Prerequisite: TH 1321.
TH 2902  Theatre Capstone Project (2-0-2)
An exit/assessment project required for all students 
completing a Liberal Studies degree with the Theatre 
emphasis. Enrollment in and completion of this course should 
be done during the semester the student plans to graduate or 
the semester before. This course consists of 5 components 
which are intended to apply theatrical principles learned 
from the Program Requirements in one final professional 
project. Prerequisites: TH 1103, TH 1513, TH 1311, TH 1321, TH 
2331, and 6 hours of additional program requirements and 
permission.
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
376

Technical Supervision & Management (TSM) 
NOTE: For information on TSM courses, contact the 
Professional Training Center, (405) 733-7488. (These courses 
are available only through Rose State College external 
training agreements with various business entities.)
TSM 1101  Leadership (1-0-1)
This course is the first course of the sequence. As the 
introductory course, Air Logistics Center officials meet with 
the participants to discuss such concepts as the vision for 
Air Logistics Center and the importance of shared vision, and 
response to change. Emphasis is placed on team building 
and employee involvement. Participants define leadership 
and identify leadership behaviors, as well as, develop 
appreciation among team members by identifying the tasks 
and roles to be accomplished.
TSM 1201  General Management (1-0-1)
Establishing balance is necessary to accomplish tasks while 
maintaining the morale of the workforce. Participants will 
understand the supervisor's role in supervising employees 
on an individual, as well as, a group basis. The supervisor's 
relationship with higher-level managers and associates will 
also be discussed. Further emphasis will be placed on 
planning, organizing, controlling, and directing skills in the 
role of a supervisor. As a continuation of the Leadership 
course, it is important for the participant to take this course 
second.
TSM 1301  Communications (1-0-1)
This course is an overview of communications, designed to 
acquaint participants with written and verbal communication 
techniques, which are more effective and more efficient. 
Participants will practice and improve written communications 
skills by preparing a memo and email and oral communications 
by preparing a basic briefing on a topic within the scope of 
their position on base. Tinker Air Force Base communication 
procedures will be incorporated into the course. This course 
should be taken after TSM 1201 and before TSM 2903.
TSM 1311  Basic Writing & Computer Skills (1-0-1)
This course is an overview of basic business communications, 
designed to acquaint participants with written communication 
techniques that can be applied in the workplace. Participants 
will practice and improve written communication skills by 
preparing business memorandums, email communications, 
and computer documents on topics pertinent to the scope of 
their assigned position in the workplace.
TSM 1501  Diversity (1-0-1)
The Diversity course uses a theoretical approach intended 
to promote thought about how individual differences can 
contribute to the workplace and how supervisor's can 
foster that environment. The course is designed to identify/
examine these implications of employee differences in the 
organizational structure. As a relatively new approach to 
working with diverse populations, personality types and 
learning styles will be presented. This course should be 
taken after TSM 1201 and before TSM 2903.
 
TSM 1601  Conflict Resolution (1-0-1)
In this course participants will identify attitudes/behaviors that 
create conflict, approaches to resolution and cooperation. 
Coaching disputing parties to communicate productively, 
distinguishing between positions, issues and interests will be 
discussed. This course should be taken after TSM 1201 and 
before TSM 2903.
TSM 1701  Alternative Dispute Resolution (1-0-1)
ADR will analyze the various aspects and components of 
alternative dispute resolution processes and negotiation 
skills. Particular emphasis will be given to the employment 
mediation process. This course should be taken after TSM 
1201 and before TSM 2903.
TSM 1901  Resolving Conflict in the Workplace (1-0-1)
This course is designed to enhance the first-level supervisor’s 
effectiveness in resolving conflict in the workplace. Students 
will gain an understanding and develop their utilization 
of specific problem-solving, arbitration, mediation, and 
negotiating skills. Topics such as identifying attitudes/
behaviors that create conflict, approaches to resolution 
including the alternative dispute resolution process, and 
promoting cooperation will be addressed.
TSM 2091-6  Special Topics (Variable)
Courses offered within a business and industry partnership 
may be available for college credit. Special topics courses 
with the TSM prefix are available for training provided that 
they are offered in conjunction with the Education and 
Training Partnership between Rose State College and Tinker 
Air Force Base.
TSM 2103  Organizational & Team Effect (3-0-3)
This course has been designed to address business and 
industry needs in the areas of team formation, project 
management, management style, stress, conflict, motivation, 
change 
management, 
interpersonal 
communication, 
managing changes and resolving conflicts and disputes. 
This course is designed to be offered in a seminar format 
with flexibility for appropriate modification to respond to 
contracts for business and industry training and development. 
 
TSM 2311  Internal Customer Service (1-0-1)
This course covers the building blocks for creating a culture of 
service, incorporating the nine principles of service excellence 
as described by Quint Studer in Hardwiring Excellence, and 
helps students develop specific skills needed for addressing 
routine as well as challenging customer service situations.
TSM 2403  Personnel/Human Relations (3-0-3)
Understanding the relationship between organizational 
requirements and characteristics of its people, as well as, the 
rights and responsibilities of employees, managers and unions 
in the workplace will be presented in this course. Specifically, 
the effects of change, morale and quality of life for the 
employee coupled with the human relations challenges facing 
individuals and organizations will be discussed. In addition, the 
impact of social systems, technical systems and administrative 
systems including employee appraisals, discipline, awards, 
discrimination, sexual harassment, grievances, training, 
staffing, safety, ergonomics and unions will be presented. 
Each participant will complete a DISC Profile to determine 
his/her personality traits. Discussion about how different 
personality traits affect a person's leadership and supervisory 
style will help participants analyze their own traits. This is a 
5-day course and should be taken after TSM 1201 and before  
TSM 2903.
 
Rose State College Catalog 2023-2024
377

Technical Supervision & Management (TSM), continued
TSM 2411  Developing Human Relations Skills for the 
Workplace (1-0-1)
This course covers basic interpersonal skills that are needed 
for establishing and maintaining positive relationships in 
the workplace and to appropriately address and effectively 
resolve conflicts that may occur in the workplace.
TSM 2421-3  Developing Leadership Skills in the 
Workplace (Variable)
This course covers basic leadership and interpersonal skills 
that are needed for establishing and maintaining positive 
relationships in the workplace and to appropriately address 
and effectively resolve conflicts that may occur in the 
workplace.
 
TSM 2703  Human Relations in Supervision (3-0-3)
This course is designed to provide the first-level supervisor 
the necessary interpersonal communications skills required 
to be effective in a large or small organization as well as in 
individual settings. The effects of change, morale and quality 
of life for the employee will be incorporated in the course 
coupled with the human relation challenges facing individuals 
and organizations. This course will incorporate the impact 
of social systems, technical systems, and administrative 
systems on the activities in the workplace.
TSM 2711  On-the-Job Training & Coaching (1-0-1)
This course prepares students to be effective on-the-job 
trainers and coaches to other employees in their areas.
TSM 2803  Financial Management/Analysis (3-0-3)
This course is designed to instruct supervisors about 
the federal budget cycle process and funds associated 
with producing center specific profit/loss projections. Key 
financial principles, standards and metrics will be presented 
in conjunction with, efficiencies, indirect labor factors, labor 
standards, overhead and overtime issues. This is not an 
accounting course, but a course to enlighten participants 
about how their work areas fit into, contribute to and benefit 
from the overall financial picture of the base. This course 
should be taken after TSM 1201 and before TSM 2903.
TSM 2813  Federal Budget Analysis & Management (3-0-3)
This course is designed to instruct first-level supervisors and 
managers of the importance of managing an organization 
within the constraints of Federal Budget and recognize 
the importance of using basic management skills in the 
implementation of their financial management responsibilities. 
The course will include the federal budget cycle process and 
funds associated with producing center specific profit/loss 
projections. Key financial principles, standards and metrics 
will be incorporated in conjunction with efficiencies, indirect 
labor factors, labor standards, overhead and overtime issues.
TSM 2903  Organizational Behavior (3-0-3)
In this course, participants will learn about developing 
structure, individual responsibility, rewards, risks and risk 
taking, warmth and support, tolerance and conflict in an 
organizational setting. Emphasis will be placed on continual 
improvement, ethical management practices and social 
responsibilities and will include employee motivation, 
group dynamics, communication, leadership, supervisor 
effectiveness and employee/manager relations. As the 
capstone course, this should be the participant's last course.
