
ACCT 2173 FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING  
Prerequisite: 
MATH 
1303 
General 
Quantitative 
Reasoning  
This course is a study of accounting theories and concepts 
involved in analyzing, processing, interpreting, and 
communicating decision-making information for internal 
and external uses. These courses are intended for majors 
and non-majors.  (Spring, Fall)  
ACCT 2183 MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING  
Prerequisite: ACCT 2173 Financial Accounting  
This course is a study of accounting theories and concepts 
involved in analyzing, processing, interpreting, and 
communicating decision-making information for internal 
and external uses. These courses are intended for majors 
and non-majors.  (Spring, Fall) 
AGEC 1373 INTRODUCTION TO AGRICULTURE 
ECONOMICS  
This course presents basic economic theory of production, 
marketing and consumption of agricultural products and 
the role and structure of agriculture in the American 
economy.  (Spring, Fall) 
AGEC 2113 FARM AND RANCH MANAGEMENT  
This course covers the application of principles and 
practices of farm and ranch management in order to 
improve or enhance the profitability of the enterprise. 
(Spring) 
AGEC 
2143 
PRINCIPLES 
OF 
AGRICULTURE 
MARKETING  
This course covers the types of marketing practices and 
alternatives to these marketing practices. Emphasis will 
be on the application of principles of marketing for 
consideration when marketing agriculture products and 
how to identify markets and market strengths and 
weaknesses in order to enhance the selling price of those 
products.  (Spring) 
AGRICULTURE 
AGRI 2001-3 AGRICULTURE SEMINAR 
This course is a study of selected topics in agriculture.  
AGRI 2103 COMMUNICATION IN AGRICULTURE  
Prerequisite:  ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course focuses on the fundamentals of agriculture 
news writing and other communication methods.  The 
students will be informed of careers in agricultural 
communications and the importance of the media in 
agriculture and related fields.  (Fall) 
AGRI 2143 INTRODUCTION TO AGRICULTURE 
EDUCATION 
This course is an exploration into the world of teaching 
agricultural education with a primary focus on the 
agricultural education programs. Required components 
will enable students to explore their roles as educators by 
including hands on experience with SAE projects 
(Supervised 
Agricultural 
Experiences), 
classroom 
observations, pedagogical methods, leadership and 
building community relationships.  (Fall) 
AGRI 2193 AGRICULTURE INTERNSHIP 
This course is designed to enhance students’ classroom 
experience in agricultural related areas. The internship 
will provide the students opportunities to gain further 
insight into the multi-faceted agriculture industry.  
(Spring, Fall) 
AGRI 2223 EXPLORATIONS IN AGRICULTURAL 
RESEARCH 
This course is designed as a research foundations 
experience which will offer students the opportunity to be 
involved 
in 
introductory 
agricultural 
research 
experiences. Explorations in agricultural research will 
enable students to see the relevance of course work in a 
“real life” learning laboratory. This course will encourage 
students to use the skills learned in the introductory 
animal science, agriculture computers, and anatomy and 
physiology classes in the exploration of agricultural 
research.  (Spring) 
AGRI 2301 SERVICE LEARNING IN AGRICULTURE 
This course integrates community service with instruction 
and reflection to enrich the learning experience, teach 
civic responsibility, and strengthen communities.  This 
course involves students in community service activities 
to enhance their academic and personal development.  
(Spring, Fall) 
AGRI 
2302 
LIVESTOCK 
PHOTOGRAPHY 
IN 
AGRICULTURE 
This course provides an opportunity for the student to 
learn how to set up livestock for photos, catalog and sale 
design, landscape agriculture, getting to know the camera, 
settings on camera, rules of photography, photo contest 
entries, exposure, balance and attractiveness of photos. 
Bracketing, High Density Resolutions and artsy 
photography will also be learned. The student will get 
information on how to manage and adjust photos on a 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

computer using Picassa, Photoshop and Photomatix.  
(Spring) 
AGRI 2303 AGRICULTURE LEADERSHIP 
The course will enable students to explore their roles as 
leaders in a changing agriculture industry. The emphasis 
will be on enabling students to explore their personal 
values system as it applies to leadership. Specific topics 
include: vision, values, balance, self-awareness and the 
leadership context.  (Spring) 
AGRICULTURE SUSTAINABILITY 
AGSU 1013 INTRODUCTION TO AGROECOLOGY 
AND SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES 
This course provides an introduction to the principles, 
history, and practices associated with sustainability and 
agroecology. Students will be exposed to topics including 
sustainable agriculture principles and outlook, soil 
fertility, tillage/no-till, composting, cover crops, crop 
rotation, and vermiculture/composting. (Fall) 
AGSU 1024 AQUAPONICS 
Prerequisite: AGSU1013 Introduction to Agroecology 
and Sustainable Practices 
This course covers aquaculture and hydroponics as they 
combine to form an aquaponics approach, including 
sustainable aquatics feed production, seeding approaches, 
micronutrient supplementation, stocking density, plant 
selection, and the basic physical and biological principles 
governing sustainable farm and agribusiness operations.  
System types presented include Deep Water Culture, 
Media-based Beds, Nutrient Film Technology and 
Vertical.  Greenhouse-based, warehouse (LED light), and 
outdoor applications will be addressed. 3 hours lecture; 1 
hour lab credit; 3 hours lecture; 1 hour lab credit. (Spring) 
AGSU 1032 ALTERNATIVE SUSTAINABLE 
ENTERPRISES 
This course provides a more in-depth examination of 
sustainable practices /enterprises including vermiculture, 
composting, recycling, vertical gardening, container 
gardening, edible landscapes, square foot / raised bed 
methodologies, water reclamation, and alternative energy 
sources. 2 hours lecture. (Fall) 
AGSU 2012 EDIBLE LANDSCAPE 
This course prepares students to design, install, maintain, 
and harvest intentional food crops and ornamental plants 
with a nutritional value which have been integrated into a 
landscape design.  Identification of edibles, planting, 
pruning, and propagation will be addressed. (Spring) 
AGSU 2022 VERMICULTURE TECHNOLOGY 
This course prepares students to engage in both 
vermiculture and vermicomposting.  Topics of study and 
application include the selection, care, breeding, and 
harvesting of worms, as well as advantages/disadvantages 
of multiple vermicompost methods.  In addition, students 
will be prepared to use both worms and vermicompost in 
traditional and alternative agricultural applications. (Fall) 
AGSU 2032 APICULTURE 
This course prepares students in the basics of keeping 
honey bees, including bee biology, care of bees 
throughout the year, and management of colonies for 
maximum bee health and honey production and 
collection. (Summer) 
AGSU 2042 CONTAINER GARDENING 
This course prepares students to design and manage 
gardening / food production system limited space or urban 
areas.  Plant selection (herbs, flowers, vegetables), water 
and fertilization needs, and container selection will be 
included, as well as other limited space growing options 
such as raised beds and square-foot options. (Fall) 
AGSU 2043 GREENHOUSE MANAGEMENT 
Prerequisite AGSU1013 Introduction to Agroecology 
and Sustainable Practices 
This course covers greenhouse facilities planning and 
equipment selection and operation, along with 
economic/business applications associated with 
greenhouse operations.  Topics include types of 
greenhouses, location factors, materials, glazing 
selection, calculation of and provision of heating and 
cooling requirements, lighting, benches, and energy 
conservation. 3 hours lecture credit. (Spring) 
AGSU 2223 APPLIED SUSTAINABILITY 
CAPSTONE 
Prerequisites: Must successfully have completed a 
minimum of 2 AGSU courses (one of which must have 
included a lab) to enroll in this course. 
This course provides an opportunity to explore areas of 
applied sustainability through the development of a 
research or advanced learning project culminating in a 
written report and capstone presentation. (Spring) 
AGRICULTURE TECHNOLOGY 
AGTE 1013 DRONE TECHNOLOGY I 
This course prepares students with an introduction to 
drone flight and proficiency, with particular focus on 
safe and efficient operation. Students will be exposed to 
multiple drone types and will have dedicated flight time 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

to become familiar with controls and techniques. In 
addition, this course will include all materials and 
knowledge base necessary to pass the FAA TRUST test 
now required for recreational drone use. (2 hours Lecture 
Credit; 1 hour Laboratory Credit) (Fall) 
AGTE 1022 DRONE PHOTOGRAPHY AND 
VIDEOGRAPHY 
This course reinforces the basics of flying a drone, with 
particular attention to fundamentals, safety, and legal 
aspects. Photography and videography instruction, 
including rules of composition relative to this type of 
imagery, practice flight patterns, and troubleshooting 
aerial imagery problems, is presented along with 
composition and photographic/videographic technique 
and editing. (1 hour lecture credit; 1 hour laboratory 
credit) (Spring) 
AGTE 1033 CODING AND ROBOTICS I 
This course provides an overview of electrical 
components including breadboards, batteries, LEDs, 
resistors, jumper wires, and switches; building series and 
parallel circuits; working with Raspberry Pi; and, writing 
code in Python. (2 credit hours Lecture; 1 credit hour 
Laboratory) (Fall) 
AGTE 2013 DRONE TECHNOLOGY II 
This course prepares students to complete the Federal 
Aviation Administration Part 107 Certification process, 
including the required examination. Key focal areas are: 
Drone Properties; Drone Maintenance; Pilot Decision 
Making; Load Factors; Use of Sectional Charts and 
Topographical Maps; Pilot Performance; and, 
Emergency Procedures. (3 hours Lecture Credit) (Fall) 
AGTE 2022 INTRODUCTION TO GIS 
This course introduces students to Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) and its applications to spatial 
data management as a tool. Overall topics include 
assessment of vector and raster systems, scale, 
resolution, map projection, coordinate systems, 
georeferencing, and GPS. Hands-on exposure to spatial 
analysis and modeling with GIS computer applications is 
provided during laboratory assignments. (1 hour Lecture 
Credit; 1 hour Laboratory Credit) (Spring) 
AGTE 2034 CODING AND ROBOTICS II 
This course provides guided practice in the use of 
electrical components, building circuits, working with 
Raspberry Pi, and writing code in Python, along with the 
complementary skills of reading schematics, 
troubleshooting, project planning, and multimeter use. 
Students will synthesize activities and knowledge base 
to build a fully programmable, mobile robot. (3 hours 
lecture credit; 1 hour laboratory credit) (Spring) 
AGRONOMY 
AGRN 1124 INTRODUCTION TO SOIL SCIENCE 
This course explores the principal physical, chemical, and 
biological properties of soil related to plant growth.  
Students will be instructed on the methods of soil testing 
and fertilizer usage.  This course also explores the 
formation and classification of soils and rural and urban 
land use. 3 hours lecture credit, 1 hour lab credit.  (Spring) 
AGRN 1214 INTRODUCTION TO PLANT SCIENCE  
This course covers the concepts and principles of plant 
growth including crop land, rangeland, and pasture land.  
It explores the importance of plant resources to the 
producer, modern management and production practices, 
and maintenance of natural resources. 3 hours lecture 
credit; 1 hour lab credit.  (Fall) 
AGRN 2333 RANGE AND PASTURE 
MANAGEMENT 
This course covers the application of range and pasture 
management principles to maintain plant and animal 
growth. Emphasis will be on identification of major range 
and pasture plants, determination of stocking rates, and 
identification of means and practices for maintaining and 
enhancing plant growth in an economical and cost 
effective manner.  (Fall) 
ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCE 
AHS 1123 MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY  
This course presents a study of basic medical 
terminology. Prefixes, suffixes, word roots, combining 
forms, special endings, plural forms, abbreviations and 
symbols are included in the content. Programmed 
learning resources, individual and group presentations, 
seminars and independent study are utilized to build study 
skills in constructing/analyzing new terms. Emphasis is 
placed on spelling, definition, usage, and pronunciation. 
Abbreviations are also introduced as related terms are 
presented.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
AHS 2001-4 TOPICS IN ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCE   
This course provides selected learning opportunities in 
specific areas of health sciences. 
AHS 2013 NUTRITION 
This course examines the basic composition of nutrients 
and accessory factors required for adequate human 
nutrition. It includes the application of nutritional 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

principles to the planning of normal and special dietary 
regime.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
AHS 2113 PHARMACOLOGY  
This course is an in-depth study of pharmacologic 
principles, 
including 
pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, 
specific 
drug 
groups 
and 
considerations in administration. Trends and issues in 
pharmacologic perspectives also are discussed. The 
course will benefit those going into health careers such as 
EMT, nursing, medicine and pharmacy.  (Spring, 
Summer, Fall) 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
ANSI 1124 INTRODUCTION TO ANIMAL SCIENCE  
This course examines the various areas and types of 
production in animal agriculture.  It provides an 
introduction to nutrition, genetics, reproduction, breeds 
within species, and an overview of the current status of 
animal agriculture in the United States. 3 hours lecture 
credit; 1 hour lab credit.  (Spring, Fall) 
ANSI 1213 LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION  
This course covers the application of the basic principles 
of livestock production. Emphasis will be on livestock 
breeds, characteristics and selection, balancing rations, 
and feeding recommendations.  (Spring) 
ANSI 2001-3 ANIMAL SCIENCE SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in Animal 
Science. 
ANSI 2023 MEAT ANIMAL/CARCASS 
EVALUATION  
This course discusses how to identify and evaluate carcass 
cuts and apply yield grades and grading standards to live 
meat animals. Students have an opportunity to select 
superior meat animals. 
ANSI 2112 LIVESTOCK EVALUATION AND 
SELECTION  
Prerequisite: Must be on the Livestock Judging Team to 
enroll in this course. 
This course covers the use of performance records, 
pedigree information and visual appraisal in the 
evaluation of cattle, swine, and sheep.  Students have the 
opportunity to judge livestock classes and give oral 
reasons. (Spring, Fall) 
ANSI 2123 LIVESTOCK FEEDING  
This course covers the principles of animal nutrition with 
emphasis on nutrients and their functions for various 
classes of livestock feeding.  Students are taught how to 
formulate rations for domestic livestock and to use the 
results of the rations to improve rate of gain and control 
production costs.  (Spring) 
ANSI 2133 ADVANCED LIVESTOCK 
EVALUATION/SELECTION 
This course provides advanced training with livestock 
evaluation and selection. Emphasis will be on the 
demonstrated ability to judge livestock classes and 
present oral reasons for selection. Students have the 
opportunity to serve on the Redlands Community College 
Livestock Judging Team. 
ANSI 2142 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION  
This course is a study and practice of artificial 
insemination of beef cattle including heat detection, 
semen 
care 
and 
storage, 
semen 
deposition, 
synchronization, sanitation, and sire selection.  (Spring) 
ANSI 2143 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF 
REPRODUCTION 
This course provides the opportunity to examine the 
reproductive systems of livestock as such systems 
produce new offspring. Emphasis will be on identifying 
the heat cycle, collecting and storing semen and semen 
deposition, applying the methods of synchronization to 
alter the heat cycle and demonstrating proficiency with 
cattle artificial insemination.  (Spring, Fall) 
ANSI 2163 BEEF PRODUCTION 
This course provides an introduction to the beef cattle 
industry. Students will study topics including cattle 
reproduction, anatomy and physiology, management, 
marketing, and pasture management. Upon completion 
students should be able to demonstrate a basic 
understanding of beef cattle production practices and the 
economic impact of the beef cattle industry in Oklahoma.  
(Fall) 
ANTHROPOLOGY 
ANTH 2013 ANTHROPOLOGY  
This course is an introduction to the study of the origin 
and development of human culture. Particular topics 
include race, society, customs, and beliefs. 
ART 
ART 1013 BASIC ART I: 2D DESIGN  
This is an introductory course in the two dimensional use 
of the principles and elements of art and design. Emphasis 
is placed on the organizational command of the 2D picture 
plane and issues of illusion. Format of this class will be a 
combination of studio practice, lecture, demonstration, 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

critique, and quizzes. Students will explore a variety of art 
mediums including: Drawing, Painting, Mixed Media, 
and Printmaking. In class exercises, process work, 
research, and written reflections challenge students to 
explore 
the 
basics 
of 
two-dimensional 
design. 
Throughout the course, students will collect works to 
create a portfolio to be evaluated at the end of the 
semester.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 1023 BASIC ART II: 3D DESIGN  
Prerequisite: ART 1013 Basic Art I: 2D Design 
This is an introductory course in the Three Dimensional 
use of the principles and elements of art and design. 
Students will work using both the additive and subtractive 
process, exploring media through representational, 
abstract and expressive works.  Technique as well as 
composition will be explored through the use of both the 
elements and principals working in three dimensions.  
Color theory will be explored and discussed in depth as 
well as the historical context of these methods. Studio 
experiences, research, and written reflections will 
challenge students to explore these processes. Throughout 
the course, students will collect works to create a portfolio 
to be evaluated at the end of each semester.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 1073 COLOR AND DESIGN  
This course is a study of color theories, perceptions, and 
the practical application of color principles to a variety of 
design problems. Students will learn color mixing and 
color application through a series of projects using color 
harmonies and visual/psychological color effects. 
Students will explore the uses of color while using the 
principles of design in the creation of original works of 
art. Throughout the course, students will collect works to 
create a portfolio to be evaluated at the end of each 
semester.  (Spring) 
ART 1113 ART APPRECIATION I  
This course is the study of art from a variety of different 
backgrounds and cultures as both product and process. 
Aesthetic judgment making in evaluation of art from 
different times and places is stressed.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 1123 ART APPRECIATION II 
This course is a study of arts, artists, and their cultures 
from the 15th Century to present.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2001-3 ART SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in art. 
ART 2063 INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL 
PHOTOGRAPHY 
Digital photography has changed the way photographers, 
both beginners and professionals, think. This class will 
give the student basics on what type of camera, computer, 
and software they may want or need to achieve the digital 
darkroom. They will learn how to capture an image and 
what to do with that image. Time will be spent on how to 
move the image from the camera to the computer, along 
with making corrections for exposure and color. One of 
the most convenient things about digital photography is 
how easy it is to share your photos with others. The class 
will cover printing, e-mailing, and how to prepare your 
photo to use on a website.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2093 PAINTING I  
This course is an introduction to the materials and 
technical aspects of painting with oil or acrylic media. 
Students will work from direct observation and reference 
material, exploring use of media through representational 
and expressive paintings. The process of painting, as well 
as 
composition 
(balance, 
unity, 
emphasis, 
and 
manipulation of space) will be explored through the use 
of color, value, line, texture, opacity, and shape. Students 
will learn color mixing and glazing techniques, and 
experiment with various brushwork and knife techniques. 
Throughout the course, students will collect works to 
create a portfolio to be evaluated at the end of each 
semester.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2103 PAINTING II  
Prerequisites: ART 2093 Painting I 
This is an advanced course focusing on the materials and 
technical aspects of painting with oil or acrylic media.  
Students will work from direct observation and reference 
material as well as exploring the use of media through 
more experimental techniques.  Students will experiment 
with the formal and expressive potential of surface and 
objective and subjective color as well as the psychological 
effects of color.   Students will learn how to stretch and 
prepare canvas and work toward finding their own voice 
and artistic style while creating original art works that 
show an extremely high level of craftsmanship and 
presentation. Throughout the course, students will collect 
works to create a portfolio to be evaluated at the end of 
each semester.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2113 DRAWING II  
Prerequisites: ART 2283 Drawing I 
This is an advanced drawing course, which builds off the 
student’s existing drawing skills and knowledge of the 
medium. The course will emphasize creative exploration 
and discovery of students’ own aesthetic language, while 
continuing to introduce and explore a variety of tools and 
techniques. Emphasis will be placed on the further growth 
of all aesthetic qualities as they relate to a more 
complicated visual means of expression.  (Spring) 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

ART 2123 NATIVE AMERICAN PAINTING  
This course introduces the student to the symbolism, 
heritage and painting techniques involved in Native 
American art. 
ART 2163 INTERMEDIATE DIGITAL 
PHOTOGRAPHY 
This course complements ART 2063, Introduction to 
Digital Photography, with students progressing in the 
areas of more advanced computer software skills and 
photography techniques. Upon completion, the students 
will possess a greater knowledge of color management 
and file formats, including JPEG, TIFF, and Photoshop 
files.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2213 SCULPTURE 
Prerequisites: ART 1013 Basic Art I: 2D Design or 
approval of the instructor 
Sculpture is the creative approach to sculptural building 
techniques and form exploration using a variety of media. 
This course will focus on idea development, using both 
traditional 
and 
nontraditional 
three-dimensional 
materials. It will emphasize conceptual reasoning and 
consideration of material choice, craft, form, space, site, 
presentation, and context. It will provide a forum for the 
discussion and exploration of sculptural practices, and the 
possibilities made available by such an expansive field.  
(Fall) 
ART 2233 POTTERY I  
This is an introductory course in the basics of ceramics. 
Students enrolled in this course need no previous 
knowledge of art. The course is structured to provide 
instruction and basic techniques of clay construction and 
design. Methods of pottery include a variety of hand 
building techniques and an introduction to wheel 
throwing. Through this course, students will develop a 
basic terminology of ceramics as well as being introduced 
to the glazing and firing process.  (Spring, Fall) 
ART 2243 PAINTING III 
Prerequisite: ART 2103 Painting II 
This course covers advanced exploration of materials and 
technical aspects of painting.  Students may use their 
choice of oil or acrylic painting media for this class.  
Students will explore the historical concepts of painting 
and contrast them to contemporary methods. Students will 
have the opportunity to concentrate on developing their 
individual concepts and means of personal expression 
while creating a substantial body of work.  (Spring, Fall) 
 
 
 
ART 2263 POTTERY II  
Prerequisite: ART 2233 Pottery I 
Pottery II is a course in advanced pottery, building off of 
previous knowledge and experience with clay. This 
course continues to develop the students’ skills in a 
variety of techniques including hand building and wheel 
throwing. Students will continue their experience and 
gain further knowledge in glazing and firing processes, as 
well as building their ceramics vocabulary. Students will 
also be given an opportunity to explore their own ideas 
and personal style in the creation of a body of work.  
(Spring, Fall) 
ART 2283 DRAWING I 
The impulse to draw is instinctive and the act of drawing 
is a vital tool in the creative process of making art.  This 
course is an introduction to drawing and emphasis will be 
on representational and expressive drawing through direct 
observation.  The process of drawing, as well as 
composition, light and shade, figure-ground relationship, 
proportion, perspective, and line quality will be explored 
in a variety of media.  The student will develop a working 
knowledge of linear perspective and gain experience in 
using other various means for creating an illusion of 
spatial depth within a drawing.  (Spring) 
ART 2443 ART IN MOVIE MAKING 
Storytelling using the visual mediums of film and video 
is a collaborative process, utilizing dozens of creative 
individuals. This course is an examination of the 
significant roles that artists play in the film, video and 
social media related industries.  (Spring, Fall) 
ASTRONOMY 
ASTR 1614 ASTRONOMY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course is designed to examine the history and 
principles of astronomy. Topics related to the solar 
system, stars, galaxies and universe are covered. Includes 
a hands-on practical experience in areas including optics, 
optical telescopes, modeling of our solar system, use of a 
telescope, and nighttime observation of constellations. 
This course will satisfy physical science requirements for 
graduation. 3 hours lecture credit, 1 hour lab credit. (Fall) 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE 
BISC 1113 BIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 
Prerequisites: none 
This course is designed to provide fundamental 
information concerning life and life processes with an 
introduction to the integration between structure and 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

function. Introduction of principles at the major levels of 
biological organization is included. This course will 
satisfy the lecture-only life science requirement for 
graduation and is not intended for health or science 
majors. 3 hours lecture credit.  (Summer, Fall, Spring) 
BISC 1114 BIOLOGY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course includes fundamental information concerning 
life and life processes with an introduction to the 
integration of structure and function.  Application of 
principles at the major levels of biological organization is 
included in both lecture and laboratory.  3 hours lecture 
credit, 1 hour lab credit.  (Spring, Fall) 
BISC 1115 PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course includes an introduction to the integration 
between structure and function among all levels of 
biological organization.  Application of principles 
utilizing the scientific method for studying cell 
structure/function, 
evolution, 
genetics, 
anatomy, 
physiology, and ecology are emphasized.  The 
investigative laboratory introduces important techniques 
and methodologies used to develop critical thinking and 
problem solving skills with additional comprehensive 
instrumentation, observation, and evaluation utilizing 
“hypothesis-based” inquiry.  This course is intended for 
Pre-Professional Science majors-Life Science option.   3 
hours lecture credit, 2 hours lab credit.  (Fall) 
BOTANY 
BOT 1114 BOTANY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course is a study of morphology, anatomy, and 
physiology of plants with emphasis in phylogenetic 
relationships. Plant ecology, variation heredity and 
economic importance are included. 3 hours lecture, 1 hour 
lab credit.   
BUSINESS 
BUS 1103 INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS  
This course is an overview of modern business and an 
introduction to various functions of business such as 
economics, management, marketing, finance, business 
law, and government involvement.  (Fall) 
BUS 1353 BUSINESS ETHICS  
This course introduces students to traditional concepts of 
ethical behavior, as they apply to the challenges of 
conducting business in the modern marketplace. The 
student will be encouraged to develop an understanding 
of ethics that is both legally and philosophically 
defensible by examination of notable moral failures in the 
business environment. Special emphasis will be given to 
the definition of ethical terms, recognition of the potential 
costs and benefits of ethical business behavior, and the 
application of this knowledge to actual business 
scenarios.  (Spring) 
BUS 2001-4 BUSINESS SEMINAR  
This course presents studies in selected topics in business. 
BUS 2093 BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
(Required), SPCH1113 Fundamentals of Speech is 
recommended or approval of the instructor. 
This course is a study and analysis of business and 
industrial communication problems, an analysis into 
communication theory and instruction and practice in 
effective communications, including the memorandum, 
letters, 
various 
business 
reports, 
proposals, 
and 
professional oral presentations.  (Fall) 
BUS 2163 BUSINESS LAW  
This is an introductory course covering the principles of 
law as applied to contracts, warranties, commercial paper, 
agencies, types of business organizations, sales, property, 
bailment’s, bankruptcy, and government regulations.  
(Spring) 
BUS 2513 BUSINESS STATISTICS 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 College Algebra 
This course focuses on techniques for descriptive and 
inferential measures with emphasis on business 
applications. Topics covered include scientific decision 
making, 
data 
summary 
techniques, 
frequency 
distributions, probability, sampling, and hypothesis 
testing.  (Fall) 
CHEMISTRY 
CHEM 1215 CHEMISTRY I WITH LAB 
Prerequisite or Co-requisite: MATH 1483 Functions and 
Modeling or MATH 1513 College Algebra or required 
score on placement exam. This course covers the 
fundamental facts, laws, principles, theories, and concepts 
of chemistry necessary for further work in science related 
subjects. There is a strong emphasis on the essential 
features of atomic structure, nomenclature, periodic 
properties, chemical bonding, molecular geometries of 
organic and inorganic compounds, stoichiometry, the 
reactions and properties of solutions, gas laws, and 
thermochemistry. 4 hours lecture;  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

 
CHEM 1315 GENERAL CHEMISTRY I WITH LAB  
Prerequisite: MATH 1483 Functions and Modeling or 
MATH 1513 College Algebra 
This course includes the fundamental principles of this 
discipline such as the philosophy of chemistry, atomic 
theory and structure, types of compounds and chemical 
nomenclature, states of matter, solutions and ionization, 
chemical reactions and stoichiometry, molecular bonding 
and structure, electron distribution and atomic spectra, 
nature of gases, acids and bases, and thermochemistry. 
Laboratory activities will correspond with the topics in 
lecture and will serve to reinforce these concepts through 
hands-on learning.  This course is designed for students 
with strong math and science ability who typically 
progress to CHEM 1415: General Chemistry II with Lab. 
4 hours lecture; 1 hour lab credit.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
CHEM 1415 GENERAL CHEMISTRY II WITH LAB 
Prerequisite: CHEM 1315 General Chemistry I with Lab 
(or equivalent) 
A continuation of CHEM 1315 General Chemistry I with 
Lab to include a study of chemical kinetics, chemical 
equilibria, 
solubility 
products, 
redox 
reactions, 
electrochemistry, chemical thermodynamics, nuclear 
chemistry, metallic/transitional elements, qualitative 
analysis, organic chemistry / biochemistry and nuclear 
chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on chemical analysis 
utilizing instrumental methods. Laboratory activities will 
correspond with the topics in lecture and will serve to 
reinforce these concepts through hands-on learning. 3 
hours lecture; 2 hours lab credit.   
 CHEM 2115 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I WITH LAB  
Prerequisites: CHEM 1415 General Chemistry II with 
Lab (or equivalent)  
This course provides students with a study of carbon and 
its compounds (inclusive of major functional groups 
except those taught in Organic Chemistry II). The study 
will place emphasis on organic molecular structures and 
nomenclature, 
synthesis 
and 
other 
reactions, 
stereochemistry and reaction mechanisms and an 
introduction to instrumental methods of analysis. 
Laboratory activities will include selected experiments 
involving the properties, preparation, analysis, and 
separation of organic compounds. Emphasis will be 
placed on tradition “wet” methods and an introduction to 
instrumental methods of analysis such as nuclear 
magnetic resonance (nmr) and infrared spectroscopy. 
Lecture (3 semester credits) and laboratory (2 semester 
credits) are combined.  
 
 
CHEM 2125 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II WITH LAB 
Prerequisite:  CHEM 2115 Organic Chemistry I with Lab 
(or equivalent) 
This course provides students with a continued study of 
organic compounds (primarily biochemistry and those 
functional groups not covered in Organic Chemistry I). 
The study will place emphasis on molecular structures 
and nomenclature, synthesis and other reactions, 
stereochemistry and reaction mechanisms and an 
introduction to instrumental methods of analyzing these 
compounds (e.g. electrophoresis, nmr, and infrared 
spectroscopy). Experiments and excursions will be 
included to provide students with “hands-on” activities to 
include calibration of instruments, chemical analysis, and 
graph interpretation. 3 hours lecture; 2 hours lab credit.  
CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
CD 2001-4 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SEMINAR  
This course includes special topic courses offered as the 
need arises in the areas of child development, early 
childhood education, and parenting education. Mini-
courses or workshops also are included. 
CD 2023 NUTRITION HEALTH AND SAFETY FOR CHILDREN  
This course covers how to establish and maintain 
physically and psychologically safe and healthy learning 
environments for children. Emphasis is on understanding 
the developmental consequences of stress and trauma, 
protective factors and resilience, the development of 
mental health and the importance of supportive 
relationships. Also covered are basic nutrition and health 
and safety management practices for young children, 
including specific procedures for infants and toddlers and 
procedures 
regarding 
childhood 
illness 
and 
communicable diseases. Discussion will include ways to 
recognize signs of emotional distress, child abuse and 
neglect in young children and the responsibility and 
procedures for reporting known or suspected abuse or 
neglect to appropriate authorities. Analysis of the USDA 
Dietary Guidelines and the application of those guidelines 
to planning meals and snacks for children are also 
covered. The course combines classroom instruction, 
hands-on activities and observations of children in group 
care.  (Spring) 
CD 2043 PARENT AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS  
This course is designed to prepare early childhood 
professionals who have the ability to establish and 
maintain positive collaborative relationships with 
families, who can respect parents’ choices and goals for 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

children and communicate effectively with parents about 
curriculum and children’s progress and who can involve 
families in assessing and planning for individual children, 
including children with disabilities, developmental delays 
or special abilities and support parents in making 
decisions related to their child’s development and 
parenting. The content includes how professionals can 
become aware of educational resources available in the 
community. Participation in and planning of family and 
community activities that relate to the early childhood 
profession is also a part of the course. (Summer, Fall) 
CD 2053 CHILD GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT  
This course emphasizes the knowledge necessary to 
understand factors that influence the development of 
young children and the sequence and interdependency of 
physical, social, emotional, cognitive and language 
development in children from birth to age eight. Covered 
also is the development and interdependency of all 
developmental areas to meet the needs of the group and 
individual while respecting each child’s unique rates of 
development. 
The 
course 
combines 
classroom 
instruction, hands-on activities and observation of 
children in group care to develop competence in working 
with young children. (Fall) 
CD 2063 BEHAVIOR AND GUIDANCE OF YOUNG 
CHILDREN  
This course emphasizes the knowledge necessary to 
provide positive child guidance strategies which help 
children learn to make responsible decisions regarding 
their own behavior and contributes to the development of 
self-control, self-motivation and self-respect. This course 
also outlines common causes of inappropriate classroom 
behavior. Also covered will be the roles families play and 
how routines, classroom arrangement and the activities 
provided have a direct effect on a child’s behavior. The 
course 
combines 
classroom 
instruction, 
hands-on 
activities and observation of children in group care to 
develop competence in working with young children. 
(Spring, Summer, Fall) 
CD 2073 MUSIC, MOVEMENT AND CREATIVE 
ARTS 
This course emphasizes the acquisition of the knowledge 
of and ability to develop and implement meaningful, 
integrated learning experiences, using the central 
concepts and tools of inquiry in music, movement, 
creative arts and perceptual motor development. 
Understanding and appreciating the role of the arts in the 
development of young children and providing children 
with meaningful experiences in the arts is also covered. 
The course combines classroom instruction, hands-on 
activities and observations of children in group care to 
develop competence in the design and implementation of 
curriculum and instructional strategies related to music, 
movement and creative arts.  (Spring, Fall) 
CD 2101 PORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT IN CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT 
In this course, the student begins compiling a professional 
portfolio. The portfolio will be developed around the state 
standards for early childhood education and the standards 
of the National Association for Education of Young 
Children. The portfolio will continue to be developed 
throughout the degree program. (Spring) 
CD 2103 EDUCATION AND SERVICES FOR 
CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS 
This course is designed to provide an understanding of 
conditions which affect children’s development and 
learning, including risk factors, developmental variations 
and developmental patterns of specific disabilities. 
Content covers how to create and modify environments 
and experiences to meet the individual needs of children 
with disabilities, developmental delays and special 
abilities. The course also includes opportunities to 
evaluate and demonstrate appropriate use of technology 
with young children, including assistive technologies. 
Knowledge of state and federal legislation related to 
providing services for children with disabilities and their 
families is also emphasized. The course combines 
classroom instruction, hands-on activities and observation 
of children with special needs.  (Fall) 
CD 2173 COGNITIVE SKILLS FOR CHILDREN 
This course explores theories of cognitive development 
and learning styles. Discussion will center on how to 
integrate curriculum and instructional strategies to 
encourage children’s critical thinking, problem solving, 
performance and technological skills. The course 
combines classroom instruction, hands-on activities and 
observations of children in group care and it provides 
opportunities to apply theories of cognitive development 
and learning styles to the design, development, 
implementation 
and 
modification 
of 
differing 
instructional approaches based upon children’s individual 
cognitive development and learning styles. (Summer, 
Fall) 
CD 2183 LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL SKILLS FOR 
CHILDREN 
This course explores methods of skill development in 
encouraging children’s language and social development. 
Emphasis will be on 1) developing an understanding of 
emergent literacy theories and practices, 2) learning how 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

to encourage classroom environments that foster positive 
dispositions toward literacy and 3) learning the processes 
and strategies for fostering young children’s writing 
skills, reading skills and second language acquisition 
skills. The course combines classroom instruction, hands-
on activities and observations of children in group care.  
(Spring) 
CD 
2203 
PROGRAM 
PLANNING 
AND 
EVALUATION IN CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
This course provides the opportunity to plan, implement 
and evaluate an integrated curriculum that focuses on 
children’s needs and interests and takes into account 
culturally 
valued 
content 
and 
children’s 
home 
experiences. Content will cover how to create, evaluate 
and select developmentally appropriate materials, 
equipment and environments that support children’s 
learning. The course will also focus on the design, 
implementation and evaluation of programs that address 
the importance of a multicultural approach to early 
childhood education. The course combines classroom 
instruction, hands-on activities and observations of 
children in group care. (Spring) 
CD 
2223 
PROFESSIONALISM 
IN 
CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT 
This course prepares students to become early childhood 
professionals who reflect on their practices, articulate a 
philosophy and rational for decisions and continually self-
assess and evaluate the effects of their choices and actions 
on others. Content will explore the early childhood 
profession and its multiple historical, philosophical and 
social foundations, including how these foundations 
influence current thought and practice. Opportunities will 
be provided to demonstrate a knowledge of and 
commitment to the professions code of ethical conduct 
and the importance of seeking out opportunities to grow 
professionally by locating and using appropriate 
professional literature, organizations, resources and 
experiences to inform and improve their practice. (Fall) 
CD 2233 ASSESSMENT & EVALUATION OF CHILD 
GROWTH & DEVELOPMENT  
This course covers the use of informal and formal 
assessment strategies to plan an individual curriculum and 
teaching practices based on each child’s growth and 
development. Emphasis will be on how to observe, record 
and assess young children’s development and learning 
and how to engage children in self-assessment for the 
purpose of planning appropriate programs, environments 
and interactions and adapting for individual differences. 
Also covered will be how to develop and use authentic, 
performance-based assessments of children’s growth and 
development to assist in planning and to communicate 
with children and parents. The course combines 
classroom 
instruction, 
hands-on 
activities 
and 
observations of children in group care. (Spring) 
COLLEGE SUCCESS 
COL 1111 COLLEGE SUCCESS  
College Success is a required course for all degree-
seeking students at Redlands Community College; it is 
also highly recommended the first semester for all 
students who wish to learn successful college and 
professional behaviors. It offers students techniques to 
increase personal responsibility, motivation, and self-
discipline as well as apply a variety of active learning 
strategies to become proficient in critical and creative 
reasoning. Students will also have the opportunity to 
expand their academic study skills as well as plan their 
college and career pathways. 
COMMUNICATIONS 
COM 
1113 
INTRODUCTION 
TO 
COMMUNICATIONS  
This course is concerned with the improvement of skills 
in four areas of communication—listening, speaking, 
reading and writing. Interpersonal and small group 
communication is also stressed. 
COM 1213 AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE I  
This is a beginning course designed to develop the 
receptive and expressive manual communication skills 
used primarily by American-born persons who are deaf. 
Emphasis is on acquiring elementary conversational skills 
through targeted grammar, syntax and vocabulary. The 
importance of nonverbal factors is incorporated through 
the use of gestures, pantomime, body language and eye 
training. 2 semester credit hours lecture; 1 semester credit 
hour  
COM 2001-3 COMMUNICATIONS SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in 
communications and other aspects of the communicative 
arts. 
COM 2113 AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE II  
Prerequisite: COM 1213 American Sign Language I  
This course is a continuation of American Sign Language 
I, with an emphasis on acquiring greater elementary 
conversational skills through an increase of targeted 
grammar, syntax and vocabulary. Expanded emphasis is 
on expressive skills to begin the development of sign 
language fluency. Completion of COM  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

Sign Language I and COM 2113 American Sign 
Language II should prepare pre-education majors to meet 
the State foreign language requirement. 2 semester credit 
hours lecture; 1 semester credit hour lab. 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 
CMSC 1223 BUSINESS APPLICATIONS SOFTWARE  
This is an introductory, hands-on course providing 
computer and software experience using the current 
version of the Microsoft Windows operating system, 
Internet Explorer and Microsoft Office Professional 
software which includes MS Word (word processing), 
MS Excel (spreadsheets), MS PowerPoint (presentations) 
and MS Access (databases). (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
CMSC 2001-4 COMPUTER SCIENCE SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in computer 
science. 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
CJ 1113 INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE  
This course is an overview of the criminal justice system 
to include police, courts, and corrections. (Spring, Fall) 
CJ 1223 INTRODUCTION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT  
This course covers the history, development, and 
functions of law enforcement. (Spring) 
CJ 1243 TRAFFIC INVESTIGATION AND 
ENFORCEMENT  
Prerequisite: CJ 2313 Criminal Law or CJ 2443 Criminal 
Law and Procedure 
Recommendation: Completion of CJ 1223 Introduction 
to Law Enforcement is helpful. 
This course is an in-depth description of police 
responsibility in traffic control, organization of traffic 
duties and accident investigation and reports. The course 
includes a discussion of safety precaution and procedures 
and an introduction to procedures for reports including 
DUI reporting.  (Fall)  
CJ 1253 AMERICAN CORRECTIONS SYSTEM  
This course is a description and analysis of the history of 
correctional thought and practice, the agencies and 
personnel responsible for carrying out criminal sentences 
and the rights and restrictions which apply to criminal 
offenders.  (Fall) 
CJ 1313 PATROL PROCEDURES 
Prerequisite: CJ 2313 Criminal Law or CJ 2443 Criminal 
Law and Procedure 
This course is an in-depth description of police 
responsibility in patrol functions and concepts, routine 
patrol duties, citizen contacts and response to police calls. 
The course includes an in-depth discussion of 
misdemeanor and felony traffic stops, patrol techniques, 
mechanics of arrest, officer survival and other patrol 
occurrences.  (Summer) 
CJ 2001-4 CRIMINAL JUSTICE SEMINAR  
This course presents studies in selected topics of 
criminal justice. 
CJ 2043 REPORT WRITING 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English comp I; CJ 2343 
criminal investigation 
This course focuses on the skills necessary for job-related 
and academic writing skills in law enforcement and 
criminal justice. Emphasis is placed upon writing 
narrative reports for incidents and fatality and non-fatality 
traffic accidents, search warrant affidavits and returns, 
memos, letters, short reports, proposals, resumes and 
research papers. Writing assignments will be based upon 
work-related scenarios relevant to law enforcement.  
(Spring) 
CJ 2053 ORGANIZED CRIME AND GANGS  
Understanding 
Organized 
Crime 
provides 
a 
comprehensive introduction to the subject of organized 
crime. This course covers the complex and controversial 
issues associated with organized crime. Topics covered 
include the various definitions of organized crime, why it 
continues to exist, how it has evolved throughout history 
and different types of organized crime factions. Students 
will learn about organized crime and how law-
enforcement practitioners today are counteracting these 
prevailing criminal organizations.  (Spring) 
CJ 2063 UNDERSTANDING VIOLENCE AND 
VICTIMIZATION 
Understanding Violence and Victimization, explores 
selected types of violence and examines the causes and 
responses to such victimization. It addresses topics such 
as domestic violence, stranger violence, workplace 
violence, school violence, criminal justice violence and 
the violence of terrorism.  (Fall) 
CJ 2073 DRUGS AND SOCIETY 
This course offers an interdisciplinary, comprehensive 
survey of all aspects of the drug and alcohol abuse issue, 
including the impact of drugs on our society; their history 
and the pharmacological impact of drugs on the body; 
drug policy implications; the criminal justice system 
response; the effects, treatment and prevention of abuse; 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

theories of use; the drug business; and drug law 
enforcement.  (Fall) 
CJ 2083 SERIAL KILLERS 
This course provides the students with a model of the 
crime scene actions of serial murderers based on 
information available. The course also gives an overview 
of the related scientific knowledge, introduces methods to 
classify the serial predator and presents a classification 
model of serial murderers and their crime scene behaviors 
based on empirical and repeatable studies, the course will 
discuss advances in the areas of police investigations, 
etiology and treatment possible.  (Fall) 
CJ 2093 INTRODUCTION TO TERRORISM 
Introduction to Terrorism will provide students with a 
working knowledge of people, ideas, organizations and 
current issues in the field. This course covers the 
historical and contemporary issues relating to terrorism. 
(Spring) 
CJ 2101-4 PRACTICUM IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE  
This course provides an opportunity to gain practical 
experience in a criminal justice setting.  (Spring) 
CJ 2201-4 SPECIFIC PROBLEMS IN CRIMINAL 
JUSTICE  
This course presents selected studies of current social 
problems in criminal justice. 
CJ 2313 CRIMINAL LAW 
This course is a study of the nature of criminal law, its 
philosophical and historical development, the definition 
and elements of major offenses in the criminal codes of 
all levels of government and the penalties which attach to 
those convicted of committing crimes. Oklahoma statutes 
are used as illustrations.  (Fall) 
CJ 2333 POLICE ORGANIZATION AND 
MANAGEMENT  
This course is a description of the principles of 
organization, leadership and management as applied to 
law enforcement agencies and personnel at all levels of 
government. The role of agency executives and major 
issues affecting personnel administration are discussed.  
(Spring) 
CJ 2343 CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION  
Prerequisites: CJ 2313 Criminal Law or CJ 2443 
Criminal Law and Procedures. 
This course is an examination of investigative 
fundamentals and principles which apply to crime scene 
processing, case building and preparation and case 
presentation in court. Emphasis is given to case 
investigation models, developing leads, theory building, 
conceptual approaches to the investigative mandate and 
information processing and reporting.  (Spring) 
CJ 2353 THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
This course is a study of the organization, management 
and leadership of institutions which confine offenders. 
The course includes discussion of short-term detention 
facilities, jails, prisons, personnel issues, staff-inmate 
relations and the future directions of institutional design 
and administration.  (Spring) 
CJ 2363 ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY 
PROCEDURES 
This course is designed to assist in gaining an in-depth 
knowledge of Environmental Security Procedures in a 
prison setting. Environmental Security Procedures is 
essential for the health, safety and welfare of the inmate, 
the correctional officer and the general public. This 
course includes the five types of emergencies that can 
occur in a correctional facility, the reasons for the 
“games” inmates play and how to effectively transport 
an inmate outside the security of the facility. 
CJ 2433 COMMUNITY AND CULTURAL 
DIVERSITY 
This course is an examination of the conflict, both 
historical and current, which prevents criminal justice 
agencies and various communities from forming lasting 
partnerships directed toward the control of crime and 
peaceful relations. New approaches to criminal justice, 
interpersonal relations and the role of the media in 
dramatizing racial and ethical differences are discussed.  
(Spring) 
CJ 2443 CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE  
This course is a study of the rules and case laws which 
define the legal methods for conducting arrests and 
searches, using force, conducting trials, introducing 
evidence, assigning legal counsel and supervising 
offenders in the community and institutions.  (Spring) 
CJ 2451 CUSTODY AND CONTROL 
Corequisite: CJ 2461 Defensive Driving and CJ 2471 
Firearms 
Prerequisite: Approval of the Instructor  
This course instructs students in the necessary attitudes, 
knowledge and psychomotor skills in the area of 
weaponless (open hand) subject control, intermediate 
range weapons use and self-defense techniques. The 
course also instructs students in how to negate or 
minimize the use of excessive and unnecessary deadly 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

force to meet legal review. It covers the need and use of 
verbal commands in the law enforcement environment. 
CJ 2453 PROBATION, PAROLE AND COMMUNITY 
TREATMENT  
This course is an examination of the most common and 
the new methods of supervising offenders in the 
community. The structure, management and personnel of 
probation, parole, and other correctional services, as well 
as innovative approaches to working with offenders such 
as house arrest, electronic monitoring, and intensive 
supervision, are discussed.  (Fall) 
CJ 2461 DEFENSIVE DRIVING 
Corequisite: CJ 2451 Custody and Control and CJ 2471 
Firearms 
Prerequisite: Approval of the Instructor  
This course is an overview of the legal aspects of law 
enforcement driving. Instruction in the skills of desirable 
law enforcement driving behavior is covered both in 
theory and application. 
CJ 2471 FIREARMS 
Corequisite: CJ 2451 Custody and Control and CJ 2461 
Defensive Driving 
Prerequisite: Approval of the Instructor  
This course provides knowledge and understanding of the 
procedures for safety and legal handling of firearms. It 
also emphasizes the mechanical functions and basic 
maintenance procedures of service revolvers. Instruction 
in the basics of marksmanship, with emphasis placed on 
the mental process involved in various shoot/don’t shoot 
situations, is covered both in theory and application. 
EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTER 
MANAGEMENT 
ECM 2123 EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTER 
FINANCIAL PLANNING & MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed to provide practical experience in 
designing and managing a financial plan and budget, as 
well as guidelines and tools for complying with or 
amending a budget. Content covered will include 
examination of budget categories, analysis of the 
expenditure ad income sides of the budget, exploration of 
basic budgetary terms and tools, examination of the 
benefits of a financial plan and analysis of personal 
financial planning and management skills and habits and 
how these skills and habits could impact the manner in 
which the professional would manage an early childhood 
center. Also included will be the development of an early 
childhood center business plan.  (Spring) 
ECM 2133 EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTER 
PERSONNEL DEVELOPMENT AND 
MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed to study the principles, procedures 
and organizational techniques currently utilized by 
business in the development and management of 
personnel. It includes a study of current developments 
within the general field of personnel development and 
management, including employment practices, employee 
assessment 
and 
evaluation, 
orientation, 
training 
programs, related federal and state legislation, regulations 
and 
orders, 
workforce 
diversity, 
employee 
and 
employer/management 
relations 
and 
compensation 
management. 
ECONOMICS 
ECON 1353 PERSONAL FINANCE  
This course is an introductory course covering the various 
problems of individual/consumer financial management. 
The recommended course content topics include: personal 
budgeting, consumer loans and installment loans, credit 
cards and charge accounts, personal insurance, savings 
accounts, investments, social security, housing options, 
commercial bank services, financial institution services, 
planning, personal taxes, wills, estate planning, retirement 
planning, and leasing arrangements. (Spring, Fall) 
ECON 2001-4 SEMINAR IN ECONOMICS  
This course is a study of selected topics in economics. 
ECON 2193 PRINCIPLES OF MACROECONOMICS 
The recommended course content topics include; basic 
principles of demand and supply, national income 
accounting, business cycles, inflation and unemployment, 
determinants of the level of output, employment and 
prices, money and banking, fiscal policy, monetary 
policy, economic growth, international trade and finance. 
(Spring, Fall) 
ECON 2203 PRINCIPLES OF MICROECONOMICS 
The recommended course content topics include; Basic 
principles of demand and supply, elasticity, opportunity 
cost, utility analysis, production and cost, market 
structures, factor market, government regulations, and 
international trade. (Spring, Fall) 
 
 
 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

ENGLISH 
ENGL 0013 FUNDAMENTALS OF READING AND 
WRITING 
This course is offered to give students an opportunity to 
improve their basic reading and writing skills through a 
curriculum of vocabulary and comprehension and rules of 
grammar and organization.  Assignments will focus on 
application of reading and writing skills for the college 
classroom as well as practical life environments.  Students 
must earn a letter grade of a “C” or higher to continue 
the English course sequence. 
ENGL 0022 COLLEGE READING AND WRITING 
Co-Requisite:  ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course assists students in developing reading and 
writing strategies that will benefit them for success in 
future college classes in their chosen academic programs.  
Emphasis will be placed on the importance of developing 
listening, reading, and writing skills.  Students will focus 
on the foundational building blocks of reading and writing 
to enhance their success in the co-requisite English 
Composition I experience. 
ENGL 0023 COLLEGE READING AND WRITING 
Co-Requisite:  ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course assists students in developing reading and 
writing strategies that will benefit them for success in 
future college classes in their chosen academic programs.  
Emphasis will be placed on the importance of developing 
listening, reading, and writing skills.  Students will focus 
on the foundational building blocks of reading and writing 
to enhance their success in the co-requisite English 
Composition I experience. 
ENGL 0153 ENGLISH PREP I 
Prerequisite: score on placement exam indicating a need 
for developmental English and/or Reading 
English Prep is a sequences of courses for TRIO Student 
Support Services’ students which is mastery-based and is 
designed to prepare student for English Composition I. 
The first level of topics for English Prep include: a 
curriculum of basic writing skills, parts of speech, 
grammar, punctuation, sentences and paragraphs.  The 
second level of topics include: developing listening, 
reading and writing skills as well as a working knowledge 
of rhetorical modes. This course is individualized and 
does provide opportunity for students to complete more 
than one level of topics during a semester course.  Course 
instruction is supplemental with a web-based learning 
system.  ***You must be TRIO SSS student in order to 
enroll in this class.***  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
ENGL 0163 ENGLISH PREP II 
Prerequisite: successful completion of English Prep I 
English Prep is a sequence of courses for the TRiO 
Student Support Services’ students which is mastery-
based and is designed to prepare students for English 
Composition I.  English Prep II focuses on level two 
topics including: developing listening, reading and 
writing skills as well as a working knowledge of rhetorical 
modes.  This course is individualized.  Course instruction 
is supplemented with a web-based learning system.  
***You must be a TRiO SSS student in order to enroll in 
this class.*** (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
ENGL 1113 ENGLISH COMPOSITION I  
This course provides an introduction to college-level 
writing and focuses on the development of 
communication that is logical, appropriate, organized 
and effective. Emphasis is also placed on critical reading 
skills and the identification of rhetorical strategies. 
(Spring, Summer, Fall) 
ENGL 1213 ENGLISH COMPOSITION II  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
In this course, students will reinforce and extend their 
abilities in academic writing and research techniques; it 
builds upon the foundational skills learned in English 
Composition I. Students will also gain practice in 
research and source evaluation, logic, argumentation and 
documentation as well as enhance their critical reading 
and thinking skills. (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
ENGL 2001-3 ENGLISH SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in English. 
ENGL 2063 CREATIVE WRITING I  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I or 
approval of the instructor 
This course is designed to develop imaginative thinking 
and writing skills in order to produce stories, poems, and 
plays. 
ENGL 2413 INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I  
Introduction to Literature reviews the major genres of 
literature: poetry, prose and drama. It also explores 
techniques of interpretation. (Spring, Fall) 
ENGL 2423 INTRODUCTION TO FICTION  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course develops a basis for the interpretation, 
evaluation and appreciation of fiction, particularly the 
novel and short story. Representative sections are read, 
discussed and analyzed, with consideration for themes, 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

mood, characterization, style, tone, language and other 
related characteristics. It introduces literary criticism. 
ENGL 2433 AMERICAN LITERATURE I 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course is designed to develop and enhance skills in 
literary interpretation. Reading selections include short 
stories, poetry, drama, biographies and essays. 
ENGL 2443 AMERICAN LITERATURE II 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course is designed to increase the ability to discern 
literary techniques in the various genres and to use this 
knowledge as a basis for interpreting literature. Reading 
selections include examples from each of the five genres. 
ENGL 2453 INTRODUCTION TO POETRY  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course is a study of poetry as literary art with 
emphasis on understanding, recognizing and appreciating 
poetic techniques and forms and the rhetoric of verse. 
Representative works are read, discussed and analyzed 
with emphasis on theme, structure and language.  
FILM AND VIDEO 
FV 2001-4 SEMINAR IN DOCUMENTARY 
FILMMAKING 
This course is a study of selected topics in documentary 
film production. 
FV-2013 DOCUMENTARY FILM 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I or 
approval of the instructor. 
This course covers the history and development of film 
as a documentary medium. Topics include major 
historical movements in documentary filmmaking as 
well as an investigation of the technical, ethical, and 
narrational challenges specific to the documentary film. 
FV 2023 VIDEO PRODUCTION 
Focuses on the skills and principles of the single camera 
technique for capturing the necessary audio- and video-
recorded elements to assemble a coherent narrative. 
Includes basic single camera usage, art direction, 
lighting, audio, and editing techniques. Detailed pre-
production, production, and post-production activities 
analyzed. 
FV 2033 BASIC AUDIO PRODUCTION 
An introduction to the tools and techniques of audio 
recording, microphone placement, playback and 
manipulation of sound elements. 
 
FV 2043 FILM AND VIDEO EDITING 
Focuses on non-linear software-based procedures and 
techniques for editing single camera productions. 
Emphasis on planning, organization, and execution of 
basic and advanced editing theories through hands-on 
assignments using non-linear digital equipment. 
FV 2053 INTRODUCTION TO SCREENWRITING 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I or 
approval of the instructor. 
This course examines the basic mechanics and structure 
of the screenplay form. Story arcs are analyzed through 
written and screened film examples. The student will 
demonstrate proficiency by writing a short project in the 
screenplay format designed to expand appreciation of the 
literary as well as the physical. 
FV 2101-4 INTERNSHIP IN DOCUMENTARY 
FILMMAKING 
This course provides an opportunity to gain practical 
experience in a documentary film production setting. 
GEOGRAPHY 
GEG 2243 HUMAN GEOGRAPHY  
A study of the major organizing concepts of human and 
cultural geography, including people’s geographic 
behavior in terms of their spatial organizations of global 
patterns of culture. (Fall) 
GEG 2253 WORLD REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY  
A study of the world’s major geographic religions 
integrating the components of the political, historic, 
economic, social and physical and environments.  (Fall) 
GEOLOGY 
GEOL 1053 EARTH SCIENCE 
This is a survey course of geology, which includes the 
study of geologic forces in the earth such as volcanism, 
earthquakes, 
plate 
tectonics, 
mountain 
building, 
gravitation, 
weathering, 
erosion, 
sedimentation, 
groundwater, glaciation, ocean events and fossilization. 
The course presents the composition of the earth’s interior 
with concentration on the crust and techniques of reading 
the geologic history from Precambrian eras to present 
through the story told by the three basic types of rocks, 
how they form and where they are found in relation to one 
another. This course will satisfy the lecture-only physical 
science requirement for graduation and is not intended for 
health or science majors. 3 hours lecture credit.  (Spring, 
Summer, Fall) 
 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

GEOL 1054 PHYSICAL GEOLOGY WITH LAB 
This is a beginning course in geology, which includes the 
study of topographic maps, rocks and minerals, 
geological process and agents, landforms, weathering, 
running water, ground water, glaciers, gravity and 
volcanism. The course includes a hands-on study of the 
properties of minerals and rocks, how to read maps-
topographic and geologic and some interpretation of 
geologic formation. This course will satisfy the physical 
science requirement for graduation. 3 hours lecture credit, 
1 hour lab credit. 
HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION, 
& RECREATION 
HPER 1191 SPORTS PARTICIPATION  
This course offers competition in basketball, baseball and 
volleyball. It may be repeated for a maximum of four 
credit hours in each sport. Each enrollment will specify 
the sport in which the student is engaged.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 1201 SUPER CIRCUIT 
Super Circuit is a self-paced course designed for each 
student to learn to use weight machines in an aerobic 
manner. Implementation of the use of weight machines 
with aerobic stations presents an opportunity to gain 
optimal level of physical fitness.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 1241 BODY BUILDING FOR WOMEN 
Body Building means more than just lifting weights. It 
means knowing how to shape and contour the body along 
with staying physically fit. This course is designed for 
female students to have individual programs for their 
optimal level of fitness.  (Fall) 
HPER 1243 INTRODUCTION TO ATHLETIC 
TRAINING 
This course is an introduction to methods of prevention 
and immediate care of athletic injuries. It covers basic 
information concerning the health and well-being of 
athletes.  (Spring) 
HPER 1252 ORIENTATION TO EXERCISE SCIENCE  
An orientation to exercise science will be will be given by 
exploring the various sub-disciplines of motor behavior, 
biomechanics, exercise physiology, exercise psychology, 
pedagogy, and sport.  It will also offer a look at career 
opportunities in the field of exercise science, along with 
philosophy, goals, and issues of health and physical 
activity in our society.  (Fall) 
 
HPER 1302 INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION  
This course is designed as an introduction to the 
profession of physical education. It includes a brief 
history, the philosophy and modern trends of physical 
education, 
teacher 
qualifications, 
vocational 
opportunities, expected competencies and skills testing.  
(Spring, Fall) 
HPER 1312 FOUNDATIONS OF RECREATION  
This course is designed to develop knowledge, 
understanding and skills in the basic outdoor recreation 
activities in the community setting. 
HPER 1322 PERSONAL HEALTH  
This course is a study of the principles from natural, 
biological, social and behavioral sciences as they may be 
applied to healthful living. It emphasizes knowledge, 
attitudes and practices related to self-direction of healthy 
behavior.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
HPER 1512 THEORY OF BASKETBALL  
This course is designed to teach the fundamental skills, 
techniques and concepts of the game for the athlete or 
prospective coach. (Fall) 
HPER 1532 THEORY OF BASEBALL  
This course is designed to teach the fundamental skills, 
techniques and concepts of the game for the athlete or 
prospective coach. (Fall) 
HPER 1553 LIFETIME FITNESS AND 
MANAGEMENT  
This course is designed to assist in developing and 
enhancing health and physical fitness. Fitness activity and 
wellness will be studied in order to assist in the 
development of regular exercise, stress management and 
proper nutrition. This course meets the institutional 
physical education requirement.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 1601 ATHLETIC/PERSONAL TRAINING 
PRACTICUM I 
This practicum provides student athletic and personal 
trainers basic knowledge dealing with ranges of motion, 
planes of the body and terminology needed to effectively 
work in a training room setting.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 2001-4 PHYSICAL EDUCATION SEMINAR  
This course is a study of special subjects or problems in 
physical education.  (Fall) 
HPER 2103 EXERCISE TESTING AND 
PRESCRIPTION 
This course covers knowledge of anatomy and physiology 
as it relates to exercise testing and prescription of 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

exercise. Students will learn to administer and interpret 
screening methodologies as a prerequisite to exercise 
testing and prescription of exercise. Students will learn to 
interpret the results of testing and prescribe the 
appropriate exercise. The course will also exercise 
protocols for special needs individuals.  (Spring) 
HPER 2302 COACHING ATHLETICS  
This is a course of study in the coaching of the major 
sports to emphasize this phase of physical education. 
Methods of coaching are studied through lectures, 
demonstrations, practice and assigned readings. (Spring) 
HPER 2312 FIRST AID   
This is a knowledge-based course designed to instruct a 
student in the emergency care of injuries and sudden 
illness. Students will be introduced to basic human 
anatomy and physiology as related to injuries in order to 
understand how body systems react to injury. Various 
first aid treatment options will be presented to help 
students understand why certain treatments are better than 
others. Prospective coaches, athletic trainers and personal 
trainers will be presented with knowledge that will help 
prepare them for periodic skills-based certification 
coursework.  (Spring) 
HPER 2343 CARE AND PREVENTION OF 
ATHLETIC INJURIES 
This course will give a general knowledge toward injury 
prevention and immediate care for the most common 
sports injuries. Basic foundations are also provided in 
more specific areas of rehabilitation.  (Fall) 
 
 
HPER 2593 PROTECTIVE TECHNIQUES IN 
ATHLETIC TRAINING 
This course is designed for the student pursuing a career 
as an Athletic Trainer, for a coach whose school does not 
have access to athletic training services or for an 
individual pursuing a career in sport medicine. This 
course will allow students to develop a basic 
understanding of the principles of supportive taping and 
wrapping and custom pad development for the prevention 
of athletic injuries.  (Spring) 
HPER 2601 ATHLETIC TRAINING LEVEL 2 
Prerequisite: HPER 1243 Introduction to Athletic Injuries 
or HPER 1601 Athletic/Personal Training Practicum I 
This practicum provides student athletic trainers an 
understanding of the proper management of serious 
injuries. Students will get hands-on application of 
experience on the proper use of ambulatory aid, care for 
cervical spine injuries and proper neurological assessment 
of concussions.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 2611 PERSONAL TRAINING PRACTICUM II 
Prerequisite:  HPER 2103 Exercise Testing and 
Prescription and HPER 1601 Athletic/Personal Training 
Practicum I 
This practicum provides student personal trainers with a 
clinical setting on the RCC campus. Students will get 
hands-on application experience in health appraisals and 
assessments, development and implementation of 
cardiovascular 
and 
strength 
training 
programs, 
reassessment tests including cardio-respiratory fitness, 
body composition, muscular fitness, flexibility and lower 
back function.  (Fall) 
HPER 2623 PERSONAL TRAINER CERTIFICATION 
COURSE 
Prerequisites: ZOOL 2134 Anatomy with Lab; ZOOL 
2144 Physiology with Lab; HPER 2103 Exercise Testing 
and Prescription; and AHS2013 Nutrition 
The course is designed to bridge the gap between clinical 
exercise science related course work and the practical 
application skills of personal training. Learn how to 
properly screen and evaluate clients for safe participation 
in an exercise program, design and implement exercise 
prescriptions for multiple populations and goal attainment 
and apply the principles of exercise in a personal training 
environment. A Personal Training Certification is 
available through the National Council for Strength and 
Fitness upon successful completion of the course.  
(Spring, Fall) 
 
 
HPER 2651 ATHLETIC TRAINING LEVEL 3 
Prerequisite:  HPER 2343 Care and Prevention of 
Athletic Injuries and HPER 2601 Athletic Training 
Level 2 
This practicum provides student athletic trainers with a 
clinical setting on the RCC campus. Students will get 
hands-on application experience to aid in the prevention 
of athletic injuries, to recognize and care for those that 
occur, to refer to the appropriate medical specialist and 
work for complete recovery through rehabilitation, so that 
RCC athletes may return to full participation as safely and 
quickly as possible. The practicum takes place over a 
semester period. During the semester the student will 
work in the RCC athletic training room and with the 
athletic teams.  (Spring, Fall) 
HPER 266 Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

Prerequisite:  HPER 2343 Care and Prevention of 
Athletic Injuries and HPER 2611 Personal Training 
Practicum II 
This practicum provides student personal trainers with a 
clinical setting in collaboration with selected facilities and 
programs in the area. Students will be placed under the 
supervision of qualified professionals in the fitness field 
to observe and expand their practical and professional 
knowledge. This invaluable field experience provides 
exposure to a variety of areas that use personal trainers. 
Learning opportunities may include working with a 
Physical Therapist, Commercial Gym Personal Trainer, 
Corporate Gym Personal Trainer, Hospital Wellness 
Program, Public School Recreation Department or Private 
Personal Trainers.  (Spring, Fall) 
HISTORY 
HIST 1483 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877  
This course is a survey of American history to 1877.  
(Spring, Fall) 
HIST 1493 UNITED STATES HISTORY, 1877 TO 
PRESENT  
This course is a survey of American history from 1877 to 
present.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
HIST 2001-3 HISTORY SEMINAR  
Prerequisite: Approval of the instructor. This course 
presents studies in selected topics in history which 
develop capabilities in historical analysis and creative 
expression. 
HIST 2123 WESTERN CIVILIZATION, ORIGINS TO 
1500 
This course is an introductory survey of the history of 
Europe and the Middle East from ancient civilizations to 
the Renaissance.  The course examines the social, 
cultural, intellectual, religious, political, and economic 
developments in civilization prior to 1500.  (Fall) 
HIST 2133 WESTERN CIVILIZATION, 1500 TO 
PRESENT  
This course is an introductory survey of the history of 
Europe, the Middle East, and the Americas from the 
Reformation to the present.  The course examines the 
social, cultural, intellectual, religious, political, and 
economic developments since 1500.  (Spring) 
HUMANITIES 
HUM 2001-3 HUMANITIES SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in humanities. 
HUM 2113 GENERAL HUMANITIES I 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course is a study of significant ideas, discoveries and 
creative achievements of humanity in the areas of art, 
music, literature, science, philosophy, religion, industry, 
technology, ethics, government and law from pre-history 
through the Renaissance.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
HUM 2173 BELIEFS AND BELIEVERS 
This course takes a comprehensive look at the nature and 
function of the religions and secular beliefs that comprise 
the major world views, including Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Taoism, Confucianism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam and 
other belief systems that are outside the scope of 
mainstream religious institutions.  
HUM 2223 GENERAL HUMANITIES II 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
This course is a study of significant ideas, discoveries and 
creative achievements of humanity in the areas of art, 
music, literature, science, philosophy, religion, industry, 
technology, ethics, government and law from the 
Renaissance through the present.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
HUM 2233 HUMANITIES THROUGH THE ARTS  
This course provides a survey of the humanities through 
art, music, literature and other artistic forms which 
illustrate the relationships among the arts and the major 
concerns of humankind. This course covers Classical 
Greece to the present. 
HUM 2243 FILM AS LITERATURE 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 English Composition I 
Film Studies is designed to introduce students to the 
aesthetics of film, how an entire film functions, how to 
analyze a film critically and how film art has changed 
throughout history. Students will learn the basics of the 
elements of literature, film form, and technique and will 
apply these principles to films screened in and out of 
class. (Spring, Fall) 
MANAGEMENT 
MGMT 2001-4 CAREER EDUCATION SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics related to 
experiential education and career awareness. 
MGMT 2033 PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT  
This course is designed to present the basic principles of 
management such as planning, decision making, 
organizing, staffing, communicating, motivating, leading 
and controlling. Concepts of management apply to both 
profit and non-profit organizations.  (Spring) 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

MGMT 2103 OCCUPATIONAL/TECHNICAL 
INTERNSHIP 
This course is a directed internship experience in an 
organization at a level requiring specific duties and 
responsibilities related to the student’s program of study. 
It is designed to integrate on-campus classroom study 
with practical hands-on work experience in the student’s 
major field of study. A student must meet all of the 
requirements for internship participation including 
completion of at least 25 credit hours of course work 
before enrollment with a 2.0 GPA or higher. During the 
semester of internship, the student is required to provide 
evidence of an hour log, objectives, and a portfolio 
outlining internship/work experience.  (Spring) 
MGMT 2143 BUSINESS LEADERSHIP 
This course is designed to integrate on-campus classroom 
study with practical hands-on business leadership and 
professional development opportunities. The student will 
establish leadership goals in the areas of business 
leadership, professional development, ethical and 
diversity 
responsibilities, 
problem-solving 
and 
community service. The student is required to provide 
evidence of these goals and their accomplishment by 
assembling a Business Leadership portfolio. The student 
will be required to participate in activities in four 
leadership environments: business, civic/community, 
educational and social.  (Fall) 
MARKETING 
MRKT 2323 PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING  
This course is designed to cover a systems approach to 
marketing in both profit and non-profit organizations. 
Topics include planning and forecasting, market 
segmentation, 
social 
responsibility, 
consumerism, 
evaluation of consumer behavior and marketing strategies 
related to introduction and prolonging of product life 
cycles, classification of consumer and industrial goods 
and services, pricing, promotion and distribution 
channels.  (Fall) 
MATHEMATICS 
MATH 0011 BASIC MATH REVIEW 
This course presents fundamental operations on integers, 
common fractions, decimals, and percents and their 
applications. (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MATH 0153 MATH PREP I 
Prerequisite: score on placement exam indicating a need 
for developmental mathematics.  
Math Prep is a sequence of courses for TRIO Student 
Support Services’ students which is mastery-based and is 
designed to prepare students for College Algebra. The 
first level of topics for math prep includes: Fundamental 
operations 
on 
integers, 
decimals, 
fractions, 
and 
percentages; geometry, data analysis, and application 
problems. A second level of topics includes: real 
numbers, order of operations, algebraic expressions, 
linear equations, inequalities, graphing, polynomials, and 
factoring. The third level of topics include: rational 
expressions and equations, systems of equations, 
quadratic equations and graphs, radical expressions and 
equations, and an introduction to functions. The minimum 
requirement for successful course completion of Math 
Prep I is level one topics. This course is individualized 
and does provide opportunity for students to complete 
more than one level of topics during a semester course. 
Course instruction is supplemented with a web-based 
learning system.  ***You must be a TRIO SSS student in 
order to enroll in this class.*** (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MATH 0163 MATH PREP II 
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Math Prep I 
Math Prep is a sequence of courses for TRIO Student 
Support Services’ students which is mastery-based and is 
designed to prepare students for College Algebra. Math 
Prep II focuses on level two and level three topics. Level 
two topics includes: real numbers, order of operations, 
algebraic expressions, linear equations, inequalities, 
graphing, polynomials, and factoring. The third level of 
topics include: rational expressions and equations, 
systems of equations, quadratic equations and graphs, 
radical expressions and equations, and an introduction to 
functions. The minimum requirement for successful 
course completion of Math Prep II is level two topics. 
This course is individualized and does provide 
opportunity for students to complete more than one level 
of topics during a semester course. Course instruction is 
supplemented with a web-based learning system.  ***You 
must be a TRIO SSS student in order to enroll in this 
class.*** (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MATH 0234 FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICAL 
REASONING 
This course surveys a variety of mathematical topics 
needed to prepare students for college-level statistics, 
quantitative reasoning or STEM path algebraic reasoning 
course. Topics include: numeracy with an emphasis on 
estimation and fluency with large numbers; evaluating 
expressions and formulas; rates, ratios, and proportions; 
percentages; solving equations; linear models; data 
interpretations including graphs and tables; verbal, 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

algebraic and graphical representations of functions; 
exponential models. Any student with an ACT math score 
< 19 is required to take the math placement exam. (Spring, 
Fall) 
MATH 0482 FUNCTIONS AND MODELING 
REVIEW 
Prerequisite: MATH 0234 Foundations of Mathematical 
Reasoning with a grade of “C” or higher, or appropriate 
course placement score. 
Co-Requisite: MATH 1483 Functions and Modeling 
This course covers the same topics as Functions and 
Modeling, but in an expanded time format. This allows 
for 
increased 
guided 
learning 
activities 
and 
learner/instructor interaction. This expanded format 
version is designed and required to be taken in 
conjunction with MATH 1483 Functions and Modeling to 
receive full academic credit. (Spring, Fall) 
MATH 0512 COLLEGE ALGEBRA REVIEW 
Prerequisite:  MATH 0234 Foundations of Mathematical 
Reasoning with a grade of “C” or higher, or appropriate 
course placement score. 
Co-requisite:  MATH 1513 College Algebra 
This course covers the same topics as traditional College 
Algebra, but in an expanded time format. This allows for 
increased guided learning activities and learner/instructor 
interaction.  This expanded format version is designed 
and required to be taken in conjunction with College 
Algebra (MATH 1513) to receive full academic credit. 
(Spring, Fall) 
MATH 1023 STRUCTURAL CONCEPTS IN 
ARITHMETIC I  
This course presents an introduction to problem solving 
and number theory as they relate to numeration systems, 
rational numbers, elementary algebra, functions and the 
use of current technologies. Does not apply toward a 
major or minor in mathematics. Does not substitute for 
MATH 1303 or MATH 1513.  (Summer) 
MATH 1123 STRUCTURAL CONCEPTS IN 
ARITHMETIC II 
This course is an introduction to geometric notation, and 
the study of constructions, measurements, similarity, 
congruence, translations, rotations, and reflections. This 
course is designed for elementary education majors. Does 
not apply toward a major or minor in mathematics. 
(Spring) 
MATH 1303 GENERAL QUANTITATIVE REASONING 
Pre-requisite of 3 years of high school mathematics OR 
a required score on placement exam OR equivalent. 
This course poses problems that involve quantitative 
relationships in real-world data by means of numerical, 
symbolic, and visual representations.  Includes an 
introduction to basic logical reasoning, basic statistics and 
probability, interpretation of numerical data, graph 
reading, hypothesis testing and simple regression.  No 
previous knowledge of these tools is assumed. Does not 
apply toward a major in nursing, business, agriculture, 
science, or mathematics.  (Spring, Fall) 
MATH 1483 FUNCTIONS AND MODELING 
Prerequisite: ACT Math sub score of 19 or appropriate 
course placement score 
This course is designed for students in agricultural, 
business, life/health science, or social science majors, 
but not certain STEM majors. This course involves the 
study of equations and functions (linear, polynomial, 
rational, exponential, logarithmic) from various 
perspectives (symbolic, verbal, numerical, graphical); 
digital techniques for graphing functions. (Spring, 
Summer, Fall) 
MATH 1513 COLLEGE ALGEBRA  
Prerequisite: ACT Math sub score of 19 or appropriate 
course placement score 
This course is designed to require the student to: 
• 
Solve system of equations: this includes but is not 
limited to polynomial, logarithmic, exponential, 
rational, radical and absolute value. 
• 
Perform operations on functions: identify the 
properties and characteristics of functions. This 
includes but is not limited to domain and range, one-
to-one, inverse, increasing and decreasing, and 
asymptotic behavior. 
• 
Identify and construct graphs and apply their 
transformations. Graphs include but are not limited to 
basics graphs, polynomial, rational and piecewise. 
• 
Apply 
algebraic 
concepts 
to 
real 
world 
problems.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MATH 1613 TRIGONOMETRY  
Prerequisite or Co-requisite: MATH 1513 College 
Algebra or required score on placement examination. 
This course will require the student to evaluate 
trigonometric functions and their inverses, graph 
trigonometric functions, prove trigonometric identities, 
solve trigonometric equations, solve problems involving 
triangles and indirect measurement, use trigonometric 
forms of complex numbers, identify and graph polar 
curves.  (Spring, Fall) 
 
 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

MATH 2001-3 MATHEMATICS SEMINAR  
This course presents selected topics in mathematics, 
studying areas not covered by the standard curricula. 
MATH 2103 BUSINESS CALCULUS  
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 College Algebra or required 
score on placement examination, either within the last 
year.  
This course is an introductory course in differential and 
integral calculus to analyze and solve theoretical and 
applied problems from business, economics, life sciences, 
and social sciences.  (Spring) 
MATH 2193 ELEMENTARY STATISTICS  
Prerequisite: ACT score of 19 or appropriate score on 
placement examination or MATH 0234 Foundations of 
Mathematical Reasoning  
This course will require the student to solve problems 
applying the concepts of random sampling, elementary 
probability, testing hypotheses, descriptive measures, chi-
square, regression and correlation, and analysis of 
variance.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MATH 2714 CALCULUS I  
Prerequisite: MATH 1613 Trigonometry or required 
score on placement examination within the last year. 
This course will require the student to compute, interpret 
and apply the basic concepts of limits, differentiation and 
integration to algebraic and transcendental functions and 
solve applied problems that include rates of change, 
optimization, area and total change in a function.  (Spring) 
MATH 2734 CALCULUS II  
Prerequisite: MATH 2714 Calculus I or required score 
on placement examination within the last year. 
This course will require the student to use integration 
techniques to find antiderivatives, compute definite 
integrals, and solve application problems that include 
volume, length of arc, surface area; investigate the 
convergence of improper integrals; perform basic 
operations on vectors and analyze functions of three 
variables and their contour plots.  (Fall) 
MATH 2754 CALCULUS III  
Prerequisite: MATH 2734 Calculus II or required score 
on placement examination within the last year. 
This course will require the student to use infinite series, 
Taylor polynomials and compute partial derivatives, 
gradients, differentials, double and triple integrals in 
rectangular, cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems, 
curl and divergence of a vector field, and path and surface 
integrals of vector fields directly and by applying Green’s 
Theorem, Stokes’ Theorem and the Divergence Theorem; 
write parameterizations for lines, curves and surfaces; and 
solve application problems that include optimization, 
work and flow of vector fields.  (Spring) 
MICROBIOLOGY 
MICR 2134 INTRODUCTION TO MICROBIOLOGY 
WITH LAB 
Prerequisite: Introductory General Chemistry Course 
with a grade of “C” or higher and 3 credit hours of life 
science with a grade of “C” or higher or permission 
of instructor.  
Introductory course based on the guidelines of the 
American Society for Microbiology. The core concept of 
microbial diversity is integrated to include microbial cell 
biology, microbial genetics and the interactions and 
impact of microorganisms on humans and on the 
environment. Laboratory exercises are aimed at 
reinforcing 
lecture 
topics, 
basic 
microbiological 
techniques as well as basic identification and safety 
techniques. 3 credit hours of lecture and 1 credit hour of 
laboratory.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
MICR 2135 MICROBIOLOGY WITH LAB  
Prerequisite: Introductory General Chemistry Course 
and 3 credit hours of life science.  
Introductory majors course based on the guidelines of the 
American Society for Microbiology. The core concept of 
microbial diversity is integrated to include microbial cell 
biology, microbial genetics and the interactions and 
impact of microorganisms on humans and on the 
environment. The basic laboratory reinforces lecture 
topics, basic microbiology techniques as well as basic 
identification and safety techniques. In addition, the 
extended laboratory introduces basic techniques of 
molecular biology such as DNA purification, agarose and 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, protein purification, 
bacterial transformation, in vitro enzyme assays, bacterial 
bioremediation and antibody detection using the ELISA 
techniques. 3 credit hours of lecture and 2 credit hours of 
laboratory. 
MUSIC 
MUS 1123 FUNDAMENTALS OF MUSIC  
This course offers hands-on experience in music methods. 
Emphasized are the five elements of music: rhythm, 
melody, harmony, form and expression.  (Spring) 
MUS 1134 MUSIC THEORY I  
This course is a review of the rudiments of tonal music: 
scales, key signature, intervals and triads. It incorporates 
four-part music writing, music analysis, composition and 
associated skills. Also included is the development of 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

basic aural skills related to sight-reading with rhythmic, 
melodic and harmonic dictation.  (Fall) 
MUS 1234 MUSIC THEORY II  
Prerequisite: MUS 1134 Music Theory I 
This course is a continuation of the integrated approach to 
music theory covering traditional diatonic practice with 
an expanded study of harmonic progression and part 
writing, music analysis, ear-training, dictation and sight-
singing.  (Spring) 
MUS 1343 MUSIC APPRECIATION  
This course is a survey of music from Baroque through 
the mid-twentieth century, with an introduction of music 
terminology and the music of antiquity (Middle Ages and 
Renaissance). Emphasis will be placed on how music 
relates as an aesthetic experience to life, culture and social 
activity.  (Fall) 
MUS 2001-3 MUSIC SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in music. 
MUS 2041 CLASS PIANO I  
This course offers group instruction in fundamentals of 
the keyboard through basic note reading, rhythm, scales 
and beginning music reading.  (Fall) 
MUS 2051 CLASS PIANO II  
Prerequisite: MUS 2041 Class Piano I 
This course offers group instruction in fundamentals of 
the keyboard with a continuation of music reading and an 
introduction to traditional piano literature.  (Spring) 
MUS 2111-2 PRIVATE INSTRUCTION IN MUSIC  
This course will be specified by each enrollment as to the 
type of private instruction. Students interested in private 
music lessons should contact a music instructor for 
additional information.  (Spring, Fall) 
MUS 2151 CHORAL UNION  
This course is a singing organization which offers the 
study and performance of standard compositions from the 
classical and popular repertory and is open to all college 
students. It requires three hours of rehearsal a week. It 
may be repeated for credit.  (Spring, Fall) 
NATURAL SCIENCE 
NASC 0123 NATURAL SCIENCE CONCEPTS  
This is a course designed to meet prerequisites to science 
courses for those students lacking two units of lab science 
in high school or acceptable ACT scores. 2 semester 
credit hours lecture; 1 semester credit hour lab.  
NASC 1013-EXPERIENTIAL APPLIED SCIENTIFIC 
RESEARCH 
Prerequisite:  Successful completion of one (1) year of 
research and instruction at BlueSTEM AgriLearning 
Center and USDA Grazinglands Research Laboratory 
This course is designed for students to apply USDA 
scientific protocols to research conducted at USDA 
Grazinglands Research Laboratory under the supervision 
of BlueSTEM AgriLearning Center Staff.  Students will 
be expected to work under the direction of USDA 
scientists, 
BlueSTEM 
educators, 
and 
designated 
education facilitators and instructors.  Requirements of 
this course include research logs, completion of interim 
assignments related to the research, oral and written 
communication, ability to follow government research 
protocols, and presentations at local, regional, state, or 
national junior science symposium(s).  (Fall) 
NASC 1023 ADVANCED EXPERIENTIAL APPLIED 
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
Prerequisite:  NASC 1013-Experiential Applied 
Scientific Research 
This course is designed for students to continue the 
application of USDA scientific protocols to research 
conducted at USDA Grazinglands Research Laboratory 
under the supervision of BlueSTEM AgriLearning Center 
Staff.  Students will be expected to work under the 
direction of USDA scientists, BlueSTEM educators, and 
designated 
education 
facilitators 
and 
instructors.  
Requirements of this course include research logs, 
completion of interim assignments related to the research, 
oral and written communication, ability to follow 
government research protocols, and presentations at local, 
regional, state, or national junior science symposium(s).  
(Spring) 
NASC 2001-3 NATURAL SCIENCE SEMINAR  
This course is an introduction to many of the various 
courses offered in science. Areas include biology, 
zoology, botany, chemistry, physics, geology and other 
related sciences. 
NASC 2012 INTRODUCTION TO APPLIED 
RESEARCH IN SCIENCE 
This course will introduce students to applying the 
scientific method to basic science research. The research 
will consist of traditional laboratory work and/or field 
research. The research will include a variety of scientific 
disciplines that span both the physical and life sciences.  
The course will require students to identify a research 
question, develop a hypothesis, plan and execute 
experiments, collect and analyze data and develop 
conclusions. The student will organize the scientific 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

research into a formal oral presentation and/or poster 
presentation.  (Spring) 
 
NASC 2014 METHODOLOGY OF APPLIED 
RESEARCH IN NATURAL SCIENCES 
This course is designed as an interdisciplinary approach 
to scientific research. Each student will be responsible for 
individual research projects which include the research, 
experimental plan and design and collection and analysis 
of field data. A required scientific report will utilize the 
scientific method offering experience of cross-curricula 
dimensions including statistical evaluation of research 
data. Areas of emphasis will include hydrology, 
agriculture, biology, chemistry, microbiology and 
technology. (Spring) 
NASC 2214 METHODS OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
AND WRITING 
This course is designed for the students to apply and 
complete the scientific method to their research from the 
previous semesters. The requirements complete the steps 
of 
scientific 
research 
by 
teaching 
the 
student 
communication through writing. The course is designed 
as a “mock publication” to be completed with an oral 
presentation. Enrollment is contingent on permission of 
instructor.  
NURSING 
NURS 1116 NURSING I 
Co-requisites: ENGL 1113 English Composition I; PSY 
1113 Elements of Psychology; and ZOOL 2134 
Anatomy with Lab  
Students will be introduced to nursing process utilized to 
shape critical thinking skills necessary to discern course 
of action in a knowledgeable yet caring manner.  Focus 
is on concepts related to professional behaviors, 
therapeutic communication, caring behaviors, health care 
safety, teaching/learning, collaboration, dosage 
calculation, pharmacology and understanding of nursing 
concepts. Each learner will be expected to accept 
accountability for personal learning and demonstration 
of safe nursing care. Coursework includes individual 
learning and assessment, group learning experiences, 
laboratory skill demonstration, laboratory simulation, 
and clinical rotation. (Fall)  
NURS 1128 NURSING II 
Students will develop additional nursing knowledge, 
pharmacological understanding, and skills to meet needs 
of patients ranging from normal maternal-child 
processes through geriatric populations.  Focus is on 
concepts building nursing knowledge, skills, and safe 
clinical reasoning highlighting caring behaviors 
necessary to meet the needs of individuals and family 
groups.  Each learner will be expected to demonstrate 
understanding of personal accountability following 
safety standards, professionalism, and caring behaviors.  
Coursework includes individual learning and 
assessment, group learning experiences, laboratory skill 
demonstration, laboratory simulation, and clinical 
rotation. (Spring) 
NURS2001-2004 NURSING TOPICS 
This course provides selected learning opportunities in 
specific areas of nursing. 
NURS 2238 NURSING III 
Students will utilize nursing knowledge, 
pharmacological understanding, and skills to safely care 
for vulnerable populations across the lifespan ranging 
from high risk maternal –child populations through 
geriatrics in critical care settings.  Students will build 
upon nursing knowledge, pharmacological 
understanding, and skills acquired in previous nursing 
courses to safely care for multiple patients in acute and 
complex care settings. Focus is on concepts building 
nursing knowledge, skills, and safe clinical reasoning 
highlighting caring behaviors necessary to meet the 
needs of individuals and family groups. Each learner 
will be expected to act with an increasing level of 
personal accountability for compliance with safety 
standards, professionalism, and caring behaviors. 
Coursework includes individual learning and 
assessment, group learning experiences, laboratory 
simulation, and clinical rotation. (Fall) 
NURS 2248 NURSING IV 
Students will build upon nursing knowledge, 
pharmacological understanding, and skills acquired in 
previous nursing courses to safely care for multiple 
patients in mental health settings and safely manage 
responsibilities for groups of patients. Focus is on 
concepts related to community-based care environments, 
vulnerable populations, and those with mental health 
concerns.   Focus is on concepts supporting a 
collaborative approach used to safely manage 
responsibilities for groups of patients in a caring manner 
within a technologically rich healthcare environment.  
Coursework includes individual learning and 
assessment, group learning experiences, laboratory 
simulation, and clinical rotation. (Spring) 
 
 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

NURS 2342 NURSING CAPSTONE 
Prerequisite: NURS 2238 Nursing III; POLS 1113 U.S. 
Government; ZOOL 2114 Physiology with Lab 
Co-requisite: NURS 2248 Nursing IV; HIST 1493 U.S. 
History 1877 to Present 
Students will individualize a personal preparation plan for 
licensure preparation.  Additional focus is on the concepts 
of health care organizations, economics, policy, ethics 
and law. 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHIL 1113 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY  
This course is a study of the human race and the universe 
through an emphasis on selections from some of the 
representative philosophers of the past and present.  (Fall) 
PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
PHSC 1114 PHYSICAL SCIENCE WITH LAB 
This is a lecture-demonstration with laboratory course. 
This course presents concepts from the areas of 
astronomy, chemistry, physics and earth sciences. 3 hours 
lecture credit, 1 hour lab credit. (Fall, Spring) 
PHYSICS 
PHYS 1115 PHYSICS I WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: Math 1513 College Algebra or required 
score on placement exam 
This is a study of mechanics, relativity, heat, 
thermodynamics and harmonic motion. Hands-on 
approaches are used in the laboratory to reinforce the 
material covered in lecture portion of the class. 4 hours 
lecture credit, 1 hour lab credit. 
PHYS 1215 PHYSICS II WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: PHYS 1115 Physics with Lab 
This is a more detailed look into the experimental side of 
physics. The course includes an in-depth study of 
electricity, magnetism, light and modern physics. 
Experiments will emphasize electrical and magnetic 
phenomena, optical properties and certain modern 
physics phenomena. The lab requires a lab notebook be 
kept and a project be performed at the end of the semester. 
3 hour lecture credit, 2 hour lab credit.   
PHYS 2515 ENGINEERING PHYSICS I WITH LAB 
Pre-requisite/Corequisite:  MATH 2714 Calculus I 
This course is a calculus based hands-on approach to 
mechanics, kinematics, force, energy, relativity, heat, 
thermodynamics, and harmonic motion.  Projects will 
include robotics, radio spectrometry and Python 
programming.  4 hours lecture credit; 1 hour lab credit.  
PHYS 2525 ENGINEERING PHYSICS II WITH LAB 
Pre-requisite/Corequisite Recommended MATH 2734 
Calculus II and MATH 2754 Calculus III OR Permission 
of Instructor 
This course is a more detailed calculus based hands-on 
approach to waves, electromagnetism, optics, relativity, 
and quantum physics.  Projects will include circuit 
building, robotics, radio spectrometry and Python 
programming. 3 hour lecture credit; 2 hour lab credit.  
POLITICAL SCIENCE 
POLS 1113 UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT  
This course studies the principles, structure, processes 
and functions of the United States federal government.  
(Spring, Fall) 
POLS 2001-3 POLITICAL SCIENCE SEMINAR  
This course presents studies in selected topics in political 
science. 
POLS 2143 INTRODUCTION TO STATE AND 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
This course looks at the place of the state in American 
federalism and studies the government of municipalities 
and counties.  (Spring) 
PSYCHOLOGY 
PSY 1113 ELEMENTS OF PSYCHOLOGY  
A survey of the major areas of study in Psychology such 
as motivation, learning, physiology, personality, social 
psychology, 
industrial-organizational 
psychology, 
perception, cognitive, abnormal behavior, and treatment. 
(Fall, Spring, Summer) 
PSY 2001-3 PSYCHOLOGY SEMINAR  
This course presents studies in selected topics in 
psychology.  (Spring, Fall) 
PSY 2033 ADOLESCENT PSYCHOLOGY  
Prerequisite: PSY 1113 Elements of Psychology  
This course covers the physical, mental, social and 
emotional development of youth, with attention given to 
observation of the adolescent.  (Spring) 
PSY 2043 SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY  
Prerequisite: PSY 1113 Elements of Psychology 
The course will cover topics such as: conformity, social 
influences, social cognition, prosocial behavior, 
prejudice, group processes, interpersonal attraction and 
social comparison. (Spring)  
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

PSY 2163 DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY  
The course will cover social, emotional, physical and 
cognitive aspects of human development throughout the 
life span. (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
SOCIOLOGY 
SOC 1113 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY  
A general survey of the field of sociology, the origin and 
development of social institutions, and social processes. 
(Spring, Summer, Fall) 
SOC 1121-3 INTRODUCTION TO SERVICE 
LEARNING 
Prerequisite: ENGL1113 English Composition I 
By combining academic theory with practical real-life 
experience, service-learning provides students with a 
broader and deeper understanding of themselves and their 
place in the community and fosters the students’ sense of 
civic engagement. This course provides academic-based, 
community service projects and adheres to the principles 
of Campus Compact. Credit hours earned will depend 
upon the amount of time the student plans to invest each 
week in the service project.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
SOC 2001-3 BEHAVIORAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCE 
SEMINAR  
This course presents selected studies in sociology. 
SOC 2133 CRIME AND DELINQUENCY  
Prerequisite: SOC 1113 Introduction to Sociology  
This course is a survey of the nature and extent of crime 
in selected areas of the nation. It includes identification of 
the contributing causes of the crime for each area; 
designation of the particular approaches to apprehension 
and identification of the socially acceptable means of 
treatment.  (Spring) 
SOC 2173 PROBLEMS IN SOCIOLOGY  
This course is an exploration of selected social issues in 
contemporary society. (Fall) 
SOC 2183 SOCIOLOGY OF THE FAMILY  
This course is an exploration of the patterns and 
purposes of courtship and insight into marriage and the 
development of family life. (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
SPANISH 
SPA 1053 CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH I  
This course covers speaking and responding in basic 
Spanish phrases and sentences. It also introduces very 
basic concepts of Spanish grammar and the reading and 
writing of simple sentences in Spanish. This course is not 
intended to fulfill foreign language degree requirements.  
(Fall) 
SPA 1063 CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH II  
Prerequisite: SPA 1053 Conversational Spanish I or 
approval of the instructor. 
This course is designed to elaborate and embellish upon 
basic conversational skills introduced in Conversational 
Spanish I. Practical oral and written communication in 
Spanish will be emphasized. This course is not intended 
to fulfill foreign language degree requirements.  (Spring) 
SPA 1115 BEGINNING SPANISH I  
This is an elementary course in Spanish grammar, 
pronunciation, reading and conversation. The student will 
be able to communicate better in a global society.  (Fall) 
SPA 1125 BEGINNING SPANISH II  
Prerequisite: SPA 1115 Beginning Spanish I  
This course is a continuation of SPA 1115 Beginning 
Spanish I, an elementary course in understanding, 
speaking, reading and writing Spanish. The student will 
be able to communicate in a global society with the 
knowledge of the Spanish language.  (Spring) 
SPEECH 
SPCH 1113 FUNDAMENTALS OF SPEECH  
This is a basic course in which principles of speech 
communication 
as 
they 
apply 
to 
interpersonal 
relationships, group discussions and individual speech 
presentations are emphasized. The practical application of 
effective speech skills and their importance to success in 
college, career and social relationships receive careful 
consideration.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
 SPCH 2001-3 SPEECH SEMINAR  
This course is a study of selected topics in speech. 
SPCH 2133 INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION  
This is a course in which skills in effective 
communications with friends, family and co-workers are 
developed through the application of theoretical 
communication principles to everyday situations. Use of 
role playing, interviewing and group discussion activities 
allows the application of acquired knowledge about self-
concept, listening, body language, assertiveness and 
conflict management to their relationships with 
individuals and small groups.  (Spring, Summer, Fall) 
 
 
  Catalog 2023-2024        Redlands Community College        Section III-Course Descriptions 
 

ZOOLOGY 
ZOOL 1125 ZOOLOGY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course is a study of the animal kingdom with 
emphasis on phylogenetic relationships, comparative 
anatomy, 
physiology, 
morphology, 
behavior 
and 
ecological relationships of all animal behavior. Evolution 
of systems and mechanisms which have allowed animals 
to survive and adapt to diverse habitats will also be 
studied. 3 hours lecture, 2 hours lab credit.  (Spring) 
ZOOL 2134 ANATOMY WITH LAB 
Prerequisites: none 
This course covers cytology, histology, development and 
gross morphology of all human body systems. A look at a 
few diseases will also be addressed in the appropriate 
body system to compare the normal conditions with the 
abnormal characteristics that develop in both lecture and 
laboratory. 3 hours lecture, 1 hour lab credit.  (Spring, 
Summer, Fall) 
ZOOL 2144 PHYSIOLOGY WITH LAB 
Prerequisite: Introductory General Chemistry course with 
a grade of “C” or higher, ZOOL 2134 Human Anatomy 
with a grade of “C” or higher or permission of 
instructor.   
This course involves the study of the functional systems 
of the human body. Included are the special senses, 
circulatory, digestive, endocrine, nervous, muscular, 
respiratory, 
skeletal, 
integumentary, 
urinary 
and 
reproductive systems. 3 hours lecture, 1 hour lab credit.  
(Spring, Fall) 
 
 
